ALL
RIGHT, WE'LL GET STARTED HERE
TODAY.
WELCOME TO THE THURSDAY JANUARY
THIRD TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
REGULAR MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR PLANNING COMMISSION FOR
DETAILED INFORMATION ON MEETING
PROCEDURES, PLEASE REVIEW THE
FULL PRINTED MEETING AGENDA
PROVIDED AND MR. LYERLY PLEASE
CALLED ROLL
ONE MOMENT PLEASE.
>> SURE.
>> OH YEAH.
AND POSSIBLY CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES WE CAN.
ALL RIGHT, LET'S TRY THAT.
COMMISSIONER LEE I'M HERE MR.
WHITE'S HERE.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT
HERE.
COMMISSIONER EVANS HERE.
COMMISSIONER DISH HERE.
COMMISSIONER MILLS COMMISSIONER
WHETHER WE HEAR COMMISSIONER
ADAMS HERE, COMMISSIONER NORTON
HERE WE HAVE A QUORUM.
>> THANK.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
APPROVAL OF THE AGENDA.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION PLEASE?
MR. WHITE SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER WHETHER IT BE ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR SAY ANY OPPOSED
SEEING NONE.
ALL RIGHT.
MOTION CARRIES ME.
I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE THE
MEETING MINUTES OF THE JANUARY
SEVEN POINT TWENTY FIVE MEETING
MOVED BY A COUNCIL MEMBER
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
WHETHER IT BE ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR SAY I BY ANY OPPOSED.
>> SORRY.
ALL RIGHT.
MOTION CARRIES I'M GOING TO
MOVE ON TO REPORTS TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
COMMUNICATIONS WE ARE GOING TO
START WITH COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
GREAT.
TUESDAY WAS A REMARKABLE DAY
BECAUSE WE CONTRIBUTED NO
BUSINESS THAT I CAN REMEMBER
UNLESS THERE WAS SOMETHING ON
THE CONSENT AGENDA.
>> OK WITH THAT MOVE ON TO
MANAGER REPORT LEONARD YEAH.
>> TWO ITEMS FOR YOU THIS
EVENING.
ONE, I'VE SHARED A MEMO WITH
YOU AT YOUR PLACE THAT I WANTED
TO JUST SUMMARIZE AT THE
JANUARY 7TH MEETING THAT THERE
WAS DURING THE CONVERSATION
ABOUT THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLAN.
THERE WAS CONVERSATION ABOUT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION
OFFERING A COMMUNICATION AND
ANCILLARY COMMUNICATION
REGARDING THE DISCUSSION OF THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
I'M SURE MANY OF YOU RECALL AND
THERE WAS SOME A REQUEST FOR
CLARITY ABOUT WHEN THAT'S
APPROPRIATE.
I THINK COMMISSIONER WYCHWOOD
BROUGHT UP THAT SOMETIMES THAT
I HAVE ADVISED THAT I DON'T
THINK IT'S APPROPRIATE YET AT
THAT TIME THAT I THOUGHT IT WAS
APPROPRIATE.
SO I THOUGHT IT MIGHT BE
HELPFUL JUST TO PROVIDE SOME
MORE CLARITY IN THIS REGARD.
ONE, I JUST WANT TO START WITH
THE FUNDAMENTAL BASIS YOU ARE
AN ADVISORY GROUP TO THE CITY
COUNCIL AND YOU CAN COMMUNICATE
WITH THE CITY COUNCIL WHENEVER
YOU DESIRE FULL STOP.
IT'S YOUR CHOICE YOU CAN DECIDE
WHEN YOU WANT TO DO THAT.
A COUPLE OF THINGS THAT I WOULD
JUST ADD TO THAT IN YOUR
CONSIDERATION.
ONE, YOU SPEAK AS A WHOLE AND
SO WHENEVER YOU ARE GOING TO
COMMUNICATE TO THE TO THE CITY
COUNCIL IT SHOULD BE AS THE
WHOLE BODY SPEAKING AND THE
BEST WAY FOR THAT TO HAPPEN IS
FOR YOU TO HAVE SPECIFIC
LANGUAGE IN FRONT OF YOU THAT
YOU CAN REVIEW MAKE SURE THAT
YOU ARE IN AGREEMENT WITH AND
TAKE THE VOTE TO ENSURE THAT
THE MAJORITY OF YOU AS THE
COMMISSION TO AGREE WITH THAT
COMMUNICATION.
SO THE BEST WAY TO DO THAT IF
THAT IS TO IS WE'VE LAID OUT A
COUPLE I'VE LAID OUT A COUPLE
OF POTENTIAL METHODS HERE.
ONE EITHER THE EXECUTIVE
COMMITTEE SUBCOMMITTEE OR A NEW
SUBCOMMITTEE COULD BE
DESIGNATED TO DRAFT THAT
COMMUNICATION PRESENTED TO THE
FULL PLANNING COMMISSION AND
THEN YOU COULD CONSIDER THAT TO
YOU COULD THROUGH JUST
CONSENSUS DESIGNATE A SINGLE
COMMISSIONER TO WORK ON THAT
LANGUAGE AND PRESENT IT.
I DO WANT TO ADVISE FOR OPEN
MEETINGS REQUIREMENTS THAT
WOULD BE IMPORTANT THAT THAT
COMMUNICATION THAT COMES
THROUGH STAFF SO WE CAN SHARE
WITH THE BOOK THE ENTIRETY
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION IN
BOTH CASES I THINK IDEALLY THAT
WOULD HAPPEN IN A SUBSEQUENT
MEETING SO THAT WE CAN BE CLEAR
THE LANGUAGE AND YOU HAVE TIME
TO REVIEW AND CONSIDER.
AND THEN FINALLY I JUST WANT TO
CLARIFY STASS ROLE SO YOU CAN
COMMUNICATE AND YOU DON'T HAVE
TO ASK OUR ADVICE ON IT IF YOU
DO ASK OF OUR ADVICE ON IT,
WE'RE GOING TO GIVE IT TO YOU.
WE'RE GOING TO GIVE YOU OUR
ADVICE.
I THINK THAT I BRING A
PERSPECTIVE OF A LOT OF WORK IN
THIS REALM BALANCING A LOT
OF FACTORS I'VE PUT IN HERE
JUST SOME OF THE WAYS THAT I
WOULD ADVISE A COMMUNICATION,
SOME OF THE THINGS THAT I WOULD
CONSIDER WHETHER OR NOT I'M
SENSING SORT OF THE CONSENSUS
OF THE COMMISSION ON AN ISSUE,
WHETHER I THINK IT IS
POTENTIALLY UNDERMINING A
DECISION OR COULD BE
INTERPRETED TO UNDERMINE A
DECISION OR AT TIMES JUST JUST
FROM A NECESSITY PERSPECTIVE
WHETHER OR NOT MY ADVICE IS
WHETHER I THINK IT'S NECESSARY
OR APPROPRIATE OR NOT.
BUT I JUST WANT TO BE CLEAR
THAT IS ADVICE FROM ME.
YOU DO NOT HAVE TO LISTEN TO
THAT IF YOU ASK WE'RE HAPPY TO
PROVIDE IT.
BUT I WANT TO BE CLEAR
ULTIMATELY THAT'S FOR YOU AS
THE COMMISSION TO DECIDE SO
JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT WAS CLEAR THAT THERE WAS
DEFINITELY I THINK CONFUSION
ABOUT THAT.
AND SO I HOPE THIS HELPS WITH
SOME CLARITY IF YOU FEEL AS YOU
GO FORWARD THAT ARE STILL SOME
QUESTIONS I'M HAPPY TO PROVIDE
WHATEVER WHATEVER FOR THEIR
SUPPORT WE CAN.
>> SECOND, I WANT TO INTRODUCE
TO YOU RELATIVELY NEW MEMBER
OF OUR TEAM, SENIOR PLANNER
MICHELLE BENNET.
MICHELLE JOINED OUR TEAM AND
TOPER AND IS PRIMARILY FOCUSED
ON THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
SO WHEN THINGS GO BAD THAT'S ME
AND WHEN THINGS ARE GOING WELL
THAT IS MICHELLE AS MICHELLE
JUST TO GIVE KIND OF A QUICK
INTRODUCTION OF HER BACKGROUND
TO THE COMMISSION.
GOOD EVENING, COMMISSIONERS'.
>> CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES, I'VE LIVED IN ANN ARBOR
FOR ABOUT TEN YEARS NOW.
I MOVED HERE TO GO TO THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN TO GET
MY MASTER'S DEGREE IN URBAN AND
REGIONAL PLANNING.
I WORK FOR PROFESSOR NORTON
THERE FOR ONE SEMESTER AND
SINCE GRADUATING I HAVE WORKED
IN PLANNING IN THE PLANNING
FIELD ALL AROUND THE STATE IN
TWENTY TWENTY TWO I CAME TO THE
CITY IF ANY OF YOU RECOGNIZE ME
FROM MY PREVIOUS ROLE I WAS A
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT SPECIALIST
WITH THE CITY WITH SYSTEMS
PLANNING AND IN OCTOBER I
STARTED WITH THE PLANNING
DEPARTMENT TO HELP WITH THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
AND IT IS
VERY NICE TO HAVE HER.
>> THAT'S MY REPORT.
GREAT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> ONE OF THE THINGS I'LL SAY
FROM TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
IS THAT I DID PASS ON SOME
OF OUR DELIBERATIONS AT THE
REGARDING THE REGARDING EAST
MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE BRIDGE AS
WELL AS THE SUN THAT SIDEWALK
DISCUSSION THAT WE HAD SO
WITHOUT ANY OTHER REPORTS FROM
COMMISSIONERS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK TO THREE
MINUTES ON A TOPIC THAT'S NOT
LISTED AS A PUBLIC HEARING AND
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
.
>> PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF
YOU'RE ON THE PHONE OR USER
OF RAISE HAND FEATURE AND ZOOM
FOR PHONE ACCESS, PLEASE CALL
EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE
THREE FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN AND
UNDER MEETING I NEED NINE SEVEN
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF WILL
IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE LAST
NAME OR THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF A PHONE NUMBER OR YOU'LL
HEAR AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT
WHEN IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK
AND PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA
AND MUTE ANY BACKGROUND SO WE
CAN HEAR YOU CLEARLY FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS PLEASE STATE YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE PRESENT?
I WOULD LIKE TO ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION.
>> OK WITH THAT.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS?
>> WE DO HAVE REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS BUT NOBODY HAS
INDICATED A DESIRE TO ADDRESS
THE COMMISSION AT THIS TIME.
>> GOT IT.
>> GOING TO GIVE A ALL RIGHT
WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO MOVE
ON.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO GO TO PUBLIC
HEARINGS SCHEDULED FOR THE NEXT
BUSINESS HEARING A LETTER NO
NEW PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
SCHEDULED FOR THE FEBRUARY 4TH
REGULAR BUSINESS MEETING.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WE'RE GOING TO GO ON TO SECTION
EIGHT A WHICH IS UNFINISHED
BUSINESS.
>> THIS IS THE PROPOSED
AMENDMENT AND NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES SECTION FIVE POINT
THREE TO POINT TWO AND THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE STAFF
RECOMMENDATION IS APPROVAL WILL
GO THROUGH PRESENTATION FROM
THE PLANNING MANAGER MR.
LEONARD, THANK YOU.
>> LET ME GIVE ME ONE MINUTE
HERE TO PULL UP THE
PRESENTATION
.
IT'S GOOD TO SEE A FULL HOUSE
SO THANK YOU.
WELCOME RELATIVE GAIL WE
USUALLY SEE YEAH WELL I FEEL
TETHERED TO THE RIGHT BUT I'LL
DO MY BEST.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
YOU MIGHT NOTICE THAT I AM NOT
ZONING COORDINATOR JOHN BENNETT
OR JOHN BAIRD EXCUSE ME
SUDDENLY CONFLATING MY TEAM
MEMBERS JOHN BARRETT JOHN WAS
DUTIFULLY MANNING THE TABLE THE
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS EARLIER
THIS WEEK ALONG WITH
COMMISSIONER.
WHETHER IT BE SO I TOLD THEM
THAT I WOULD BE HAPPY TO DO MY
BEST TO PROVIDE THIS IN HIS
STEAD.
SO YOU PREVIOUSLY HAD A
CONVERSATION ON THIS.
THIS IS HIS PROPOSED CHANGES TO
THE NON CONFORMING STRUCTURE
PROVISION OF OUR TEXT AMENDMENT
IN SHORT RIGHT NOW ANY
ALTERATION TO NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURE OFTEN REQUIRE
TYPICALLY REQUIRES APPROVAL BY
THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS AS
SHARED WITH YOU PREVIOUSLY.
THESE ARE ALMOST GENERALLY
ALWAYS APPROVED AND THE ZONING
BOARD OF APPEALS WAS COGNIZANT
OF THAT AND IN FACT INITIATED
THAT STAFF AND THE PLANNING
COMMISSION CONSIDER LOOKING AT
THESE PROVISIONS IN ORDER TO
IMPROVE THE EFFICIENCY OF THAT
PROCESS.
SINCE THE LAST TIME YOU SAW
THIS, WE'VE HAD ANOTHER
PETITION GO THROUGH THAT
PROCESS THIS WEEK.
SO WE'RE NOW AT TWENTY THREE
OF TWENTY THREE PRETTY GOOD
RATIO.
TWENTY TWO OF THEM WERE
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES AND ONE
NON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
AND AS YOU'LL KNOW FROM THE
PREVIOUS DISCUSSION WE ARE
PROPOSING TO CHANGE THE
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES THAT ARE
SUBJECT TO THIS PROVISION NOW
TO BE AN AUTOMATIC APPROVAL.
SO AS LONG AS THE EXTENT OF THE
NON CONFORMITY IS NOT EXPANDED
OR OTHER NONCONFORMITY ARE NOT
CREATED , WHEN YOU SAW THAT
WHEN YOU DISCUSSED THIS
PREVIOUSLY, I THINK THAT THERE
WAS A COUPLE OF POINTS
OF CLARIFICATION IN QUESTION.
THE BIG TAKEAWAY IS THAT THAT
WE WERE CONCERNED THAT WE WERE
GOING IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION
OF EFFICIENCY BY ADDING
STANDARDS WHERE CURRENTLY THE
LANGUAGE IS PRETTY SIMPLE AND
DIRECT IN THE PROPOSED LANGUAGE
WE'VE TRIED TO RESPOND TO THAT.
BUT ONE OF THE REASONS ONE
OF THE WAYS THAT WE I WANT TO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT WE RESPONDED
TO THAT IS NOT BY ELIMINATING
THE STANDARDS BUT BY MAKING IT
CLEAR THAT THERE IS A
DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE
LANGUAGE THAT REMAINS FOR NON
RESIDENTIAL USES AND THAT IT IS
STILL A DISCRETIONARY APPROVAL
BY THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
AND WHAT WE ARE PROPOSING IN
THIS PROPOSED LANGUAGE IS
ESSENTIALLY A BY RIGHT
ALTERATION.
IT DOESN'T THERE'S NO
DISCRETION INVOLVED.
IF YOU MEET THOSE STANDARDS
YOUR PERMITS SHALL BE ISSUED
AND SO THAT LANGUAGE HAS BEEN
MODIFIED TO NOT HOPEFULLY MAKE
THAT CLEAR AND TO SPECIFICALLY
REMOVE ANY SORT OF AN IMPENDING
OR INTEND IMPLIED DISCRETION
OF A PLANNING MANAGER IN ORDER
TO MAKE THAT JUDGMENT.
IN FACT, IT SAYS IF YOU MEET
THOSE STANDARDS YOU CAN
CONTINUE WITH YOUR ALTERATION
THIS IDEALLY IS GOING TO HAVE
BENEFITS FOR BOTH FOR THE
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS TO
FOCUS ON FEWER APPLICATIONS.
IT'S GOING TO HAVE BENEFITS TO
OUR USE OF RESOURCES THAT WE
ARE GOING THROUGH THAT PROCESS
FOR APPLICATIONS THAT ARE
APPROVED AT AN INCREDIBLY HIGH
RATE AND IT'S GOING TO HAVE A
VERY SIGNIFICANT BENEFIT ON
THOSE PROPERTY OWNERS ARE GOING
TO BE ABLE TO MOVE MUCH MORE
QUICKLY WITH THEIR PROPOSED
PROJECTS.
SO YOU'VE SEEN SOME OF THESE
EXAMPLES.
I'M NOT GOING IT'S ALREADY I'M
NOT GOING TO SPEND A LOT
OF TIME JUST TO REITERATE ONE
EXAMPLE IS CONVERTING NON
HABITABLE SPACE INTO A
HABITABLE SPACE.
THIS IS A COMMON OCCURRENCE
THAT HAPPENS WHERE WE HAVE A
NON CONFORMING PROPERTY THAT
PERHAPS WANTS TO RENOVATE THE
BASEMENT TO ADD ADDITIONAL
BEDROOMS OR AN ADDITIONAL UNIT
.
HERE'S AN EXAMPLE OF THAT
DOESN'T MEET THE DIMENSIONAL
BACKS.
THERE'S NO EXPANSION OF THE
NONCONFORMITY, THE LOTERIA OR
SETBACKS THEY DESIRE TO ADD
BEDROOMS IN THE BASEMENT.
CURRENTLY THIS WOULD REQUIRE
CONSIDERATION BY THE ZONING
BOARD OF APPEALS UNDER THE
PROPOSED CHANGE THIS WOULD BE A
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY WOULD MEET
ALL OF THOSE TESTS AND THE
PERMIT WOULD BE ISSUED WITHOUT
FURTHER DISCRETION OR
CONSIDERATION.
>> ANOTHER EXAMPLE IS
INCREASING THE HEIGHT OR
EXPANDING THE FOOTPRINT OF A
STRUCTURE THAT IS NOT
CONFORMING DUE TO LOT SIZE LOT
WITH THEIR SET BACKS.
THIS IS AN EXAMPLE OF THAT
CIRCUMSTANCE.
THIS IS AN EXISTING HOUSE THAT
DOESN'T MEET THE DIMENSIONS
OF THE SET BACK DIMENSIONS
OF THE PROPERTY.
IT HAS A TWO POINT TWO FOOT
SEVEN INCH SET BACK THAT
DOESN'T MEET THAT STANDARD.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT WE
UNDER THIS PROPOSED LANGUAGE WE
ARE SAYING THAT YOU CANNOT
EXPAND A NONCONFORMITY THAT
REQUIRES SOME INTERPRETATION BY
STAFF.
WE EVALUATED A LOT OF DIFFERENT
LANGUAGE BUT IN THIS CASE THIS
DOES NOT EXPAND THE
NONCONFORMING CITY.
THE PROPERTY HAS A TWO FOOT
SEVEN INCH SETBACK BACK AND IT
WOULD REMAIN TO HAVE A TWO FOOT
SEVEN INCH SETBACK.
I FULLY ACKNOWLEDGED MORE
OF THIS BUILDING IS GOING TO BE
ALONG THAT SETBACK BUT THAT THE
NONCONFORMING DIMENSION IS NOT
CHANGING.
WE DON'T MEASURE SETBACK BY THE
DURATION OR BREADTH BY WHICH IT
TOUCHES THAT PROPERTY.
WE MEASURE THE MINIMUM
DIMENSION BETWEEN THE STRUCTURE
AND THE PROPERTY LINE SO WE
KEPT THE PROPOSED LANGUAGE VERY
SIMPLE DOES NOT EXPAND THE
NONCONFORMING HIRES.
ANOTHER EXAMPLE OF THAT SCENE
THIS IS A PROPERTY THAT IS
INTENDED TO ADD.
IN ADDITION IT DOESN'T MEET THE
REAR SET BACK OF THE PROPERTY.
THEY WANTED TO BUILD AN
ADDITION INTO THE SIDE YARD
AGAIN RATHER THAN REQUIRING
NONCONFORMITY AN ALTERATION TO
A NONCONFORMING APPLICATION AND
DECISION BY THE ZONING BOARD
OF APPEALS.
THIS WOULD CAN TO BE ELIGIBLE
BY RIGHT THROUGH THE PERMITTING
PROCESS AND THESE PROVISIONS
BECAUSE IT WOULD MEET ALL THOSE
TESTS OF THE PROPOSED LANGUAGE.
LET'S NOT CREATING A NEW
NONCONFORMITY.
IT'S NOT EXPANDING IN
NONCONFORMITY AND A PERMIT
COULD BE ISSUED.
ALL OF THIS IS GOING TO PROVIDE
A LOT OF NEW OPPORTUNITY FOR
MORE EFFICIENCY.
IT'S GOING TO PROVIDE EASIER
OPPORTUNITY TO REALIZE MORE
INTENSE USES ON PROPERTIES OVER
A LONG TERM.
ARGUABLY IT COULD HAVE THE
EFFECT OF SLOWING THE
AMORTIZATION OF NONCONFORMING
USES OUT OF OUR COMMUNITY.
BUT I WOULD ARGUE FROM THE
TRACK RECORD OF THESE BEING
APPROVED THAT DOESN'T SEEM TO
BE AN IMPORTANT PRIORITY FOR US
AND IT'S NOT SOMETHING THAT'S
CERTAIN OF CONCERN JUST FROM
STAFF PERSPECTIVE I'M SO HAPPY
TO ADDRESS ANY QUESTIONS NOW OR
AFTER THE PUBLIC HEARING.
>> OK, YEAH.
WHAT WE'LL DO IS WE'LL GO TO
PUBLIC HEARING FIRST AND THEN
WE WILL GO TO DISCUSSION AND
PLEASE DO REMEMBER THAT THIS IS
A AMENDMENT TO THE UDC.
SO THIS IS JUST A
RECOMMENDATION TO CITY COUNCIL
.
>> LET'S HAVE TWO READINGS I
THINK AT CITY COUNCIL.
SO ALL RIGHT WITH THAT WE'RE
GOING TO GO ON TO A PUBLIC
HEARING.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS PRESENT AND REMOTE
TO SPEAK FOR THREE MINUTES ON
THIS ITEM.
WE'LL FIRST TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
THE PHONE AND USE A REAL HAND
FEATURE IF YOU'RE ON THE ZOOM
PHONE ACCESS PLEASE CALL EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TWO FOUR SEVEN AND
INTERMEETING EIGHTY NINE SEVEN
SEVEN SIX SIX THREE FOUR ONE
TWO TWO SIX.
CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
DIGITS THE PHONE NUMBER OR BY
NAME ON ZOOM YOU'LL HEAR AN
MADE AN ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S
YOUR TURN TO SPEAK AND PLEASE
ENSURE THAT YOU'RE IN A QUIET
AREA FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT THAT
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK ON THIS
ITEM AT THIS TIME?
ALL RIGHT, SEE NONE.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE
CALLERS?
>> NO ANSWERS.
LET'S GIVE IT A MINUTE
.
THE MASSES REMAIN SILENT.
>> THANK YOU.
ALWAYS SET UP THREE MISSISSIPI
SILENTLY.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO MOVE
ON TO THE PROPOSED MOTION WHICH
IS THAT THE ANN ARBOR CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION HEREBY
RECOMMENDS THAT THE MAYOR AND
CITY COUNCIL APPROVE AMENDMENTS
TO CHAPTER FIFTY FIVE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE SECTION FIVE
POINT THREE TWO POINT TWO
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE TO
ALLOW ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL
FOR ADDITIONS TO NONCONFORMING
BUILDINGS IN A RESIDENTIAL
ZONING DISTRICT AS PROPOSED.
>> WE HAVE A MOVE MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER TO BE SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER ABRAMS DISCUSSION
WHO'D LIKE TO KICK US OFF
COMMISSIONER ADAMS FIRST OF ALL
THANKS TO STAFF FOR WORKING ON
I THINK THIS IS A LOT BETTER.
THANKS ALSO TO COMMISSIONER
NORTON FOR YOUR WORK TRYING TO
MAKE IT MARK IT UP.
I'M STILL A LITTLE BIT CONFUSED
ABOUT WHAT THE SUBCLAUSES ARE
DOING.
IT FEELS LIKE WHAT WE'VE DONE
WITH THAT LANGUAGE HERE IS
DEFINED VARIANCE IN THE
CODE BECAUSE THAT'S EVERY ONE
OF THOSE ITEMS IS A THING THAT
WOULD KICK YOU INTO THE
VARIANCE WORLD.
SO IF I'VE SAID THE PLANNING
MANAGER CAN APPROVE UNLESS IT
MEETS ONE OF THESE FOUR THINGS
THAT IT WOULD ONLY MEAN IF IT'S
NOT THE THING THAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT, IT IS RIGHT THAT
WE'VE WE'VE MORE OR LESS IT'S
GOING TO BE BY OPERATION OF LAW
NONE OF THOSE THINGS TO BE ON
THIS TRACK IF YOU'RE EXPANDING
AND NONCONFORMITY IF YOU'RE
ADDING A NEW ONE, YOU'RE
INVARIANCE LAND AT THAT POINT I
JUST WANT TO BE COGNIZANT
OF THE FACT THAT WE'RE WE DON'T
HAVE A DEFINITION FOR VARIANCE
.
WE'VE KIND OF CREATED A LITTLE
BIT OF ONE HERE.
MAYBE THAT'S AN OPPORTUNITY
LATER ON.
I'M NOT IT FEELS LIKE SURPLUS
LANGUAGE TO ME BECAUSE AGAIN
WE'RE ONLY CONSIDERING THIS AS
A AS A ALTERATION NONCONFORMING
IF IT IS NONE OF THOSE THINGS.
SO THE STANDARD BY WHICH A
PLANNING MANAGER WOULD NOT
APPROVE IT IF IT WAS ONE
OF THOSE THINGS IT WILL NEVER
IT WILL NEVER HIT ONE OF THOSE
TRIGGERS BECAUSE IT WOULDN'T BE
CONSIDERED AS A AS ALTERATION
TO A NON CONFORMING TO BE IN
THIS WORLD.
BUT I'M IT'S STILL A LOT BETTER
THAN WHERE IT WAS.
>> SO I'M I'M INCLINED TO VOTE
YES.
THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER COMMISSIONERS
THOUGHTS RELATED TO THIS
PARTICULAR PROPOSED AMENDMENT
SEEING NONE.
THIS ONE SEEMS FAIRLY
STRAIGHTFORWARD.
AGAIN, NO EXACERBATION OR
EXPANSION OF THE ACTUALLY THE
SIMPLICITY OF EXPANSION
ACTUALLY MAKES IT PRETTY GOOD.
SO I THINK WITH THAT THEN WE
CAN JUST MOVE TO A ROLL-CALL
VOTE FOR THE RECOMMENDATION TO
CITY COUNCIL.
>> MR. LEONARD?
YES, ONE MOMENT.
OH NO PROBLEM.
AS A NAME.
>> THANK YOU COMMISSIONER LEE.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
YES, COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT
.
YES.
COMMISSIONER EVANS.
COMMISSIONER DISH.
YES.
>> YES.
COMMISSIONER DISH.
COMMISSIONER MILT'S IS NOT
>> YES.
HERE.
COMMISSIONER MILT'S IS NOT
>> COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE.
HERE.
>> YES.
>> COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE.
ENTHUSIASTICALLY YOU MIGHT GET
>> YES.
SOME NIGHTS OFF NOW
ENTHUSIASTICALLY YOU MIGHT GET
COMMISSIONER ATOM'S YES
SOME NIGHTS OFF NOW
COMMISSIONER.
COMMISSIONER ATOM'S YES
YES.
COMMISSIONER.
MOTION CARRIES.
YES.
>> ALL RIGHT.
MOTION CARRIES.
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
THANK YOU.
REGULAR BUSINESS SECTION NINE A
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
THIS IS A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
REGULAR BUSINESS SECTION NINE A
PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSION.
THIS IS A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SO WE'RE GOING TO START WITH
PRESENTATION AND DISCUSSION.
STAFF PRESENTATION.
SO WE'RE GOING TO START WITH
>> MR. LEINERT, BACK TO YOU.
STAFF PRESENTATION.
IT IS AND YOU'RE GOING A LOT
>> MR. LEINERT, BACK TO YOU.
FASTER THAN I EXPECTED.
IT IS AND YOU'RE GOING A LOT
THANK YOU.
FASTER THAN I EXPECTED.
>> I MEAN DURING COVID I THINK
THANK YOU.
WE COULD PLAY THE JEOPARDY
>> I MEAN DURING COVID I THINK
THEME SONG ON PIANO.
WE COULD PLAY THE JEOPARDY
>> I REMEMBER MICHEL YEAH.
THEME SONG ON PIANO.
YEAH YEAH.
>> I REMEMBER MICHEL YEAH.
MAYBE A LITTLE QUARTER
.
I THINK THIS WILL BE A ROBUST
DISCUSSION SO JUST ONE SHOULD
WE GET TO THE END SOON ENOUGH?
>> YEAH.
OK SO THANK YOU THIS MY
COLLEAGUE MICHEL AND MIKE
TOLTON TEAM HAS HONESTLY LET ME
GO A LITTLE ROGUE HERE SO I'M
GRATEFUL FOR THAT.
>> BUT BIG PICTURE IS WE'RE
WE'RE HARD AT WORK AND STARTING
TO DRAFT THIS DOCUMENT AND A
COUPLE OF THEMES EMERGED LATE
IN THE PROCESS, PARTICULARLY AT
THE LAST STEERING COMMITTEE
MEETING AND AT THE LAST
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SUBCOMMITTEE
MEETING THAT ARE DISTINCT FROM
HOW I'VE BEEN THINKING ABOUT
THE PLAN AND ASPECTS OF THE
PLAN AND SOME OF OUR
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE PUBLIC
OVER THE COURSE OF THE LAST
YEAR.
AND SO I WANT TO HIGHLIGHT SOME
OF THOSE.
I'M GOING TO GO THROUGH THE
ENTIRETY OF THE PRESENTATION WE
DID SCHEDULE A PUBLIC HEARING
SO THERE'S OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO BOTH HERE AND REMOTE
TO WEIGH IN AS WELL AND THEN MY
GOAL IS NOT ANY MOTIONS BUT I
AM GOING TO BE LOOKING TOWARDS
YOU AS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
FOR SOME FEEDBACK AND SOME
REFLECT ARE GOING TO BE
REFLECTING BACK BACK WHAT WE'RE
HEARING ON SOME OF THOSE INPUT
POINTS TO MAKE SURE THAT AT THE
END OF THE DAY WE'RE GOING TO
DO THE WORK TO ROLL UP OUR
SLEEVES AND WORK ON THE
DOCUMENT THAT YOU'RE GOING TO
WANT TO SEE AT THE END OF THIS
PROCESS.
WE'RE GOING TO BE HAVING THE
SAME CONVERSATION WITH THE CITY
COUNCIL AS WELL AT A WORKING
SESSION IN FEBRUARY.
SO IT'S LOTS OF OPPORTUNITIES
HOWEVER AND THE CONTEXT I JUST
WANT TO REMIND YOU ARE THE
DRAFTER AND THEY ARE THE THUMBS
UP OR THUMBS DOWN OR SO BOTH
ARE IMPORTANT BUT THIS IS YOUR
DOCUMENT AND SO YOUR YOUR
FEEDBACK IS GOING TO BE REALLY
IMPORTANT TO US AS WE WRESTLE
WITH SOME OF THESE ISSUES.
SO OUR CONFIDENCE IN OUR TEAM
AND TEAM ALSO WILL BE JOINING
US OVER THE COURSE OF THE
EVENING.
SOME OF THEM WILL BE JOINING US
A LITTLE BIT LATER BUT THEY'RE
GOING TO BE ALL AVAILABLE VIA
ZOOME AS WELL.
SO JUST REITERATING WHAT I
SAID, WE'RE STARTING TO DRAFT
THE DOCUMENT LOOKING FOR
DIRECTION FROM BOTH THE
COMMISSION AND THE CITY COUNCIL
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE ARE GOING
TO ARRIVE AT AN END POINT THAT
FEELS TO BE YOUR VISION.
>> WHY DON'T YOU WORK DURING
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT WHICH
WE'VE BEEN DOING ROBUSTLY WE'VE
SHARED UPDATES ON ALL THE
METHODS WE'VE ENGAGED THE
PUBLIC OVER THE PAST YEAR.
THE MAJORITY OF PEOPLE WELCOMED
INCREASED DENSITY BUT WHAT THAT
MEANS TO PEOPLE MEANS A LOT
OF DIFFERENT THINGS.
ONE OF THE WAYS FRANKLY WE
TRIED TO SCALE THAT FOR PEOPLE
IN THOSE CONVERSATIONS IS TO
START TALKING ABOUT A NUMBER
OF UNITS IN PREVIOUSLY OUR ONE
OUR TWO NEIGHBORHOODS.
SINCE THAT TIME WE'LL GET TO
THERE'S BEEN QUESTIONS RAISED
ABOUT WHETHER THAT'S RIGHT,
WHETHER THAT LIMIT IS
APPROPRIATE.
AND SO THAT'S ONE OF THE THINGS
WE WANT TO GET FEEDBACK.
THERE'S ALSO GOING TO BE AS
PART OF THE BACKGROUND RESEARCH
ON THIS WE TALK A LOT ABOUT
DIVERSIFICATION OF THE TAX
BASE.
WE ARE A COMPANY TOWN FULL
STOP.
WE WILL ALWAYS BE A COMPANY
TOWN FULL STOP WHEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT DIVERSIFICATION
OF THE TAX BASE, IT'S PROBABLY
A LOT MORE MODEST THAN A
COMMUNITY THAT DOESN'T HAVE
SUCH A VERY SIGNIFICANT
INSTITUTIONAL EMPLOYER LOCATED
HERE.
BUT IT DOESN'T MEAN THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE SHOULD FOREGO
WHEN LIKE ANYTHING ELSE WHEN
TAX BASE IS SOLELY FOCUSED IN
ONE CATEGORY IT IS AT RISK FOR
SWING ECONOMIC SWINGS IN THAT
CATEGORY I CALIBRATE THAT WITH
US OUR EXPERIENCE IN A
COMMUNITY WHERE WE'RE PROBABLY
A LOT MORE INSULATED FROM A
JOBS PERSPECTIVE THAN IF OUR
LARGEST EMPLOYER WAS A
TRANSMISSION PLANT OR IT WAS A
REFINERY FOR THAT MATTER.
BUT NONETHELESS WHEN WE CAN
HAVE A DIVERSE TAX BASE THAT
DOES PROVIDE US SOME STABILITY
AND SOME RESILIENT SEE WHEN
CERTAIN SEGMENTS GO THROUGH
ECONOMIC SWINGS.
>> IDEALLY THE CITY IS A PLACE
THAT'S A REAL CITY.
>> IT'S IDEALLY A PLACE WHERE A
LOT OF DIFFERENT THINGS HAPPEN,
A LOT OF DIFFERENT COMMERCE HAS
TRANSPIRED.
A LOT OF PEOPLE OF DIFFERENT ME
OF DIFFERENT EDUCATIONAL
BACKGROUNDS CAN THRIVE WORK
HOUSING IS PART OF THAT.
JOBS ARE A PART THAT AND
RECOGNIZING THAT OUR WINDOW OR
OUR APERTURE TO ALWAYS HAVE A
LOT OF INFLUENCE OVER THESE
THINGS IS MODEST.
WE DO HAVE SOME INFLUENCE
THROUGH OUR LAND USE POLICIES
BUT THERE'S A LOT OF OTHER
FACTORS THAT GO INTO THIS THAT
ARE OUTSIDE OF OUR CONTROL AND
SO WE HAVE THE POTENTIAL TO
OVEREGG LATE BECAUSE BECAUSE
THAT WINDOW IS SO NARROW IF WE
ARE TOO CONSTRAINED WE'RE KIND
OF CHOKING THE ONLY OPPORTUNITY
INFLUENCE WE HAVE AT THE SAME
TOKEN, IT'S ALSO A VERY MODEST
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO HAVE
INFLUENCE AND TO PUT OUR OUR
THUMBPRINT ON WHAT WE WANT OUR
COMMUNITY TO BE.
SO WE ALSO HAVE THE POTENTIAL
TO UNDER REGULATE.
THERE ARE NO RIGHT OR WRONG
ANSWERS BUT THESE ARE THE
BALANCES THAT WE NEED TO THINK
ABOUT WHEN WE'RE NOT ONLY
SETTING A VISION FOR THE CITY
BUT HOW WE'RE GOING TO REGULATE
IT.
>> SO START WITH LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL IS WHAT YOU'RE
SEEING HERE IS LARGELY ALL
OF THE EXISTING R-1 IN OUR TWO
ZONES AND THROUGHOUT THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
IT ACCOUNTS FOR THIRTY SIX
PERCENT OF ALL LAND IN THE CITY
AND ABOUT HALF OF ALL LAND
THAT'S NOT ZONED PUBLIC OR
TOWNSHIP.
>> THIS AS PART OF OUR CURRENT
FUTURE LAND USE MAP THAT WE
HAVE AS PART OF 95 PERCENT
OF THE GEOGRAPHY OF ZONE LAND
IN THE CITY THAT ALLOWS
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AND
THIS IS OBVIOUSLY A BIG
GEOGRAPHIC AREA AND
THIS IS THE
AREA THAT I THINK COMES TO MY
MIND FOR A LOT OF OPPORTUNITY
FOR MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING.
WE'VE ALREADY ALLOWED ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNITS.
I THINK THIS IS A GREAT
OPPORTUNITY TO SUBDIVISION TO
TAKE THAT STEP FURTHER IN OUR
COMMUNITY WE ARE ARE NOT UNIQUE
FROM A LOT OF OTHER COMMUNITIES
ACROSS THE COUNTRY WHO HAVE
SYSTEMATICALLY SHOT OURSELVES
IN THE FOOT FROM A REGULATORY
PERSPECTIVE OVER HISTORY A LOT
OF COMMUNITIES HAVE SAID YOU
CAN PUT SINGLE FAMILY IN THESE
GREAT SWATHS OF YOUR CITY AND
EVERYTHING ELSE HAS TO GO ON A
MUCH SMALLER FOOTPRINT.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF OPPORTUNITY
TO NOT ONLY PROVIDE MORE
QUANTITY OF HOUSING IN THE CITY
BUT MORE TYPOLOGY OF HOUSING IN
THE CITY AND PART OF WHAT WE
ENVISION IS A LOW LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL AREA CAN ACHIEVE
THIS IN PART BIG PICTURE WE
HAVE ABOUT FIFTY THREE THOUSAND
HOUSING UNITS IN THE CITY.
I WANT CALL OUT THAT ORIGINALLY
A VERSION OF THE SLIDE HAD A
SIXTY EIGHT THOUSAND NUMBER
THAT CAME FROM DATA THAT I JUST
CAN'T VALIDATE AS ACCURATE.
IT CAME FROM ASSESSING DATA
THAT I DON'T BELIEVE IS
ACCURATE.
IT'S NOT USED FOR HOUSING UNIT
COUNTS.
THIS NUMBER IS BASED ON THE
NUMBER OF CERTIFIED RENTALS
THAT THE CITY IS INSPECTED OVER
THE PAST EIGHT YEARS AND OWNER
OCCUPIED HOMES THAT ARE
RECEIVING THE PRINCIPAL
RESIDENCE EXEMPTION.
SO THAT'S A I THINK THAT
THERE'S LOTS OF OPPORTUNITIES
TO IMPROVE THIS NUMBER.
WE WILL CONTINUE TO TRY TO DO
THAT OVER THE LAST THREE YEARS.
SIX HUNDRED EIGHTY NEW HOMES
HAVE COME ONLINE.
THAT'S SIX HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
NEW CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
FOR HOMES OF ALL TYPES AND THAT
RELATES TO THE STATE THE
MICHIGAN STATE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY HAS
ADOPTED A PLAN AND IT HAS PUT
DOWN PUT OUT TARGETS FOR OUR
COMMUNITY.
>> IT BREAKS THE STATE INTO
REGIONS AND SUBREGIONS.
SO WE ARE DOING PRETTY GOOD AS
IT RELATES TO RENTAL HOUSING
TARGETS BUT WE'RE NOT DOING
VERY GOOD AS RELATES TO OWNER
TARGETS.
IT SHOULD BE NOTED THAT THE WAY
THEY MEASURE THOSE IS DIFFERENT
.
THEY'RE NOT MEASURING THEM AS
LIKE DETACHED OR CONDOS.
THEY'RE MEASURING OWNERSHIP
OPPORTUNITIES AND THEY'RE
MEASURING RENTAL OPPORTUNITIES
WE HAVE APPROVED OR UNDER
EITHER SITE PLANS THAT ARE
APPROVED AND UNDER CONSTRUCTION
OR SITE PLANS THAT MADE IT
THROUGH THE PROCESS BUT HAVE
NOT YET STARTED CONSTRUCTION
INCLUDE FIFTY THREE HUNDRED
UNITS CURRENTLY.
SO WHEN I SAY PIPELINE I SAY
THAT WE HAVE FIFTY THREE
HUNDRED UNITS IN THE PIPELINE
WE HAVE ANOTHER COUPLE I THINK
JUST UNDER TWO THOUSAND THAT
ARE CURRENTLY UNDER REVIEW.
SO TO BE CLEAR THAT FIFTY THREE
HUNDRED NUMBER IS NOT A GOAL IT
IS JUST THAT A MEASURE OF THE
QUANTITY OF ALL OF THE
APARTMENTS, CONDOS, HOMES THAT
HAVE BEEN APPROVED BY THIS BODY
ME THE CITY COUNCIL AND OUR
EITHER UNDER CONSTRUCTION
CURRENTLY OR AWAITING
CONSTRUCTION AND THEN WHEN
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT POTENTIAL
NEW HOUSING UNITS, WE ARE
EXPLORING THE WAY WE'RE
APPROACHING THIS FROM THE
PROJECT TEAM AS WE'RE LOOKING
AT THESE LAND USE CATEGORIES
AND WE'RE ASSUMING SOME
DENSIFICATION AND SOME OUTCOMES
OF THOSE AND DEPENDING ON WHAT
THOSE ARE THAT COULD NET US
HOUSING POTENTIAL OF THIRTY TO
NINETY SEVEN THOUSAND UNITS
JUST FROM A GEOGRAPHIC
PERSPECTIVE.
>> BUT WHEN WE'RE LOOKING AT
THOSE NUMBERS, I JUST WANT TO I
JUST WANT TO FRAME IN A COUPLE
OF ASPECTS ONE THAT IS A VERY
SIMPLISTIC LOOKING AT
GEOGRAPHY'S APPLYING
IDENTIFICATION OF X UNITS PER
ACRE AND DOING MATH.
THERE IS A LOT
OF INFRASTRUCTURE QUESTIONS
THAT WE'VE TALKED ABOUT THAT
RELATE TO BEING ABLE TO SUPPORT
THAT MANY HOMES WHEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT INCREASING THE
ANNUAL PRODUCTION OF HOUSING TO
THESE DIFFERENT RATES.
>> THERE ARE PEOPLE ON THIS
PANEL THAT KNOW THIS MUCH
BETTER THAN I DO.
BUT THE NOTION THAT WE ARE
GOING TO SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASE
THE PRODUCTION OF HOUSING BY
TWO TIMES OR THREE TIMES OR
FIVE TIMES OVER THE COURSE
EVERY YEAR OVER THE COURSE OF A
TWENTY FIVE YEAR PERIOD IS VERY
,VERY AGGRESSIVE.
>> THAT IS NOT ONLY AGGRESSIVE
FROM A LAND USE PLANNING
PERSPECTIVE AND AN
INFRASTRUCTURE PERSPECTIVE
THAT'S AGGRESSIVE FROM A
CAPITAL PERSPECTIVE.
IT'S AGGRESSIVE FROM A MARKET
RATE, A MARKET ABSORPTION
PERSPECTIVE.
IT'S A PROGRESSIVE PROBLEM FROM
FINDING CONTRACTORS AND
SUPPLIES AND MATERIALS
AGGRESSIVE.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING ELSE TO
KEEP IN MIND.
AGAIN, I THINK THAT'S AN
EXAMPLE OF THINGS THAT ARE
OUTSIDE OF OUR CONTROL AND
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT I ASK YOU
TO WEIGH WHEN YOU'RE THINKING
ABOUT BALANCING THESE FACTORS.
WHAT'S THE RISK?
ARE WE GOING TO OVERPLAY
UNDERPLAY RECOGNIZING THERE'S A
LOT OF POTENTIAL FACTORS THAT
ARE GOING TO RELATE TO THAT
ACHIEVEMENT OR NOT LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL?
WE HAVE BEEN TALKING WITH THE
COMMUNITY FOR THE LAST YEAR
THAT WE ENVISION A GREAT
EXPANSION OF OUR SINGLE FAMILY
DISTRICTS TO ALLOW A MULTITUDE
OF HOUSING TYPOLOGIES WITHIN
ALL OF THOSE DISTRICTS.
SPECIFICALLY WE'VE BEEN TALKING
ABOUT UP TO FOUR UNITS.
THIRTY FIVE FEET I WANT TO BE
CLEAR THAT AND THAT THIS CAN BE
A TENSION.
I THINK WHEN WHEN YOU HEAR ME
TALKING OR YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
A HEIGHT I THINK ON ONE HAND
IT'S VERY HELPFUL TO RELATE A
CHARACTER OR A GOAL TO
SOMETHING WE KNOW AND WE CAN
SEE IN OUR COMMUNITY.
BUT WE ALSO HAVE TO RECOGNIZE
THAT THIS PROCESS OF SETTING
OUR VISION FOR WHAT WE WANT AND
WE MIGHT NOT KNOW EXACTLY WHAT
THAT HEIGHT IS AND I JUST WANT
TO ADMIT I FIND MYSELF GETTING
PULLED BACK AND FORTH WITHIN
WITHIN THAT TERMINOLOGY AND
IT'S A BALANCE THAT WE HAVE TO
BE MINDFUL OF .
WE MIGHT NOT HAVE ALL THE
ANSWERS TO WHAT THAT HEIGHT IS
NOW, BUT I'M PROVIDING YOU WITH
A LOT OF DATA BECAUSE I THINK
IT'S HELPFUL FOR
CONTEXTUALIZING HOW DIFFERENT
TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT LOOK AND
OUR EXPERIENCE IN OUR
COMMUNITIES SO THAT WHEN WE'RE
THINKING ABOUT THAT WE KNOW WE
HAVE TANGIBLE EXAMPLES OF WHAT
THAT LOOKS RESIDENTIAL CAN BE
REGULATED BY THE NUMBER
OF UNITS IT CAN BE REGULATED BY
FORM OR OTHER DIMENSIONAL
STANDARDS OR ANY COMBINATION
OF THOSE THINGS AND IT DOESN'T
HAVE TO INCLUDE ALL THOSE
THINGS.
SO HERE'S SOME EXAMPLES
OF MULTIPLE DIFFERING SCALES
AND BOTH THIS AND WE PROVIDED
AN ATTACHMENT OF A LOT
OF PROJECTS THAT WE JUST WANTED
TO PROVIDE EXAMPLES OF OF
PROJECTS OF DIFFERING HEIGHT,
DIFFERING DENSITIES, NUMBER
OF UNITS.
WE ADDED FOUR AREA RATIO AS A
WAY OF CONSIDERING WHETHER OR
NOT THAT MIGHT BE A FACTOR.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A
PARTICULARLY GOOD FACTOR
BECAUSE SO MUCH OF THAT
DEVELOPMENT IS REALIZED ON
LARGER SCALE DEVELOPMENTS.
AT THE SAME TIME I TRIED TO
SHOW SOME EXAMPLES MORE
CONTEXTUAL OF JUST TAKE ONE
BUILDING ON A LARGER SCALE SITE
.
THE FAILURE OF LACOURT ON
ELSWORTH IS NOT VERY
SIGNIFICANT.
HOWEVER, IF WE WERE TO REGULATE
OUR LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL TO
ALLOW FORTY FIVE FEET IN HEIGHT
AND NO LIMIT ON THE NUMBER
OF RESIDENTIAL UNITS, I JUST
WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT THIS
BUILDING COULD BE REALIZED IN
THAT ZONING DISTRICT AGAIN
THERE'S A LOT OF FACTORS IT
MIGHT NOT BE BUT THIS IS
IMPOSING JUST THAT BUILDING
FOOTPRINT SANS ANY OTHER SITE
ATTRIBUTES INTO WHAT IS NOW
MORE OF A CURRENT SINGLE FAMILY
DUPLEX ORIENTED LAND USE
PATTERN.
SO THEY'RE JUST INTENDED TO BE
EXAMPLES.
WE HAVE HAD TIME OVER
EXPERIENCE WHERE PROJECTS THAT
ALLOW A GREATER NUMBER OF UNITS
HAVE HAVE BEEN HAMPERED BY
FACTORS OTHER THAN A LIMITATION
ON UNITS.
THIS PARTICULAR PROJECT IS
PRETTY INFAMOUS IN THE CITY AND
THE ULTIMATE ONE OF THE MAJOR
FACTORS THAT GOVERN THE NUMBER
OF UNITS HERE WAS HOW MUCH
PARKING THEY COULD REALIZE ON
SITE.
SO WE'VE ADDRESSED THAT BUT IT
JUST IT CAN HAPPEN IN A LOT
OF DIFFERENT WAYS.
DIFFERENT REGULATIONS CAN
IMPACT THE SCALE SIZE AND
QUANTITY OF UNITS IN A
DEVELOPMENT.
>> THIS IS A BUILDING THAT'S
FORTY NINE FEET HIGH AT A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN SUBCOMMITTEE
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A FORTY
EIGHT FOOT HIGH LIMIT AS FAR AS
A RANGE OF A CONSTRUCTION
TYPOLOGY THAT MIGHT BE
RELATIVELY AFFORDABLE SORT OF A
STICK OVER PODIUM THAT'S VERY
COMMON AGAIN JUST SHOWING AN
EXAMPLE OF A BUILDING THAT
MIGHT BE IN PROXIMITY TO THAT
AND AND FOR YOU TO THINK ABOUT
IS THIS THE RIGHT SCALE THAT
YOU ENVISION SEEING IN OUR ONE
OUR TWO NEIGHBORHOODS?
THE QUESTION IS ASKED, YOU
KNOW, DO WE HAVE TO REGULATE BY
THE NUMBER OF UNITS AND
OF COURSE WE DO NOT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF DIFFERENT
WAYS WE CAN REGULATE.
THIS COMES FROM SMART GROWTH.
AMERICA THIS IMAGE IT TALKS
ABOUT A VERY SIMPLISTIC WAY TO
DO THAT.
DIFFERENT DEVELOPMENT CAN BE
REGULATED.
I WOULD SAY THAT AS YOU MOVE
FROM LEFT TO RIGHT HERE THE
DESIGN COST THE PROCESS OF THE
PROCESS TIME AND COSTS AND
PROBABLY THE DEVELOPMENT COSTS
ALL INCREASE.
>> I CAN'T SIT HERE AND I'M NOT
GOING TO PRETEND THAT THERE ARE
WAYS THAT WE COULD TRY TO
MINIMIZE THAT.
BUT GENERALLY
I PRESUME I AM
MAKING THE ASSUMPTION EVEN AS A
DESIGNER UNDERSTANDING ALL THE
REGULATIONS ON THE FOREIGN
BASED CODE IS GOING TO BE MORE
COMPLEX AND MORE TIME INTENSIVE
THAN OH AS LONG AS I KNOW I'M
OUT OF THIS HEIGHT AND THESE
SETBACKS I CAN GO FORWARD BUT
THERE ARE WAYS TO REGULATE
WITHOUT DOING IT BY A NUMBER
OF UNITS FOR SURE.
SO SOME OF THE QUESTIONS THAT
WE'LL GET TO IS SHOULD LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL REPLACE OUR ONE IN
OUR TWO DISTRICT OR DO YOU
ENVISION SOMETHING ELSE?
IF SO, WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO TO
US WHEN WE TALK ABOUT THE
MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING, WHAT
ARE THE PROJECTS SAMPLES THAT
DO OR DON'T FALL INTO THAT
CATEGORY MAYBE WAY TO THINK
ABOUT THAT.
I'M DRAWING A LINE I JUST
ARBITRARILY PUT A LINE HERE ON
THIS CATEGORY THAT I THINK IT
IS SORT OF OUR CONVERSATION
OVER THE LAST YEAR TO
OVERSIMPLIFY IS INCLUDING
EVERYTHING LEFT OF THE LINE
PROBABLY AND THOSE ARE ONE IN
OUR TWO DISTRICTS BUT I DON'T
THINK WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
DENSITY EVERYBODY WAS
ENVISIONING EVERYTHING TO THE
RIGHT OF THE LINE AND SO WHAT
DOES THAT MEAN?
HOW DO WE WANT TO APPROACH IT
AND WHEN DO WE WANT A MASS
SCALE STANDARD IS THAT
IMPORTANT TO US AND AT ALL AND
IF SO, DO WE DESIRE TO DO THAT
THROUGH SOMETHING OTHER THAN A
UNIT COUNT?
>> ALL RIGHT.
GETTING TO MIXED USE AREAS BOTH
HUBS AND CORRIDORS.
SO THIS IN THIS CONTEXT
PROVIDES PROBABLY SOME OF MOST
SIGNIFICANT CHANGE AND MOST
STATUS QUO LAND USE POLICIES
THAT THE FUTURE LAND USE MAP
CURRENTLY SHOWS.
FIRST OF ALL, IT SHOWS A LOT
OF WHAT WE'RE CALLING MIXED
TRANSIT TRANSITION ZONES.
THESE ARE A LOT OF THE YELLOW
CORRIDORS THAT YOU SEE ALONG
THIS THAT REPRESENT ABOUT
TWENTY FIVE HUNDRED NEW ACRES
OF SORT OF CORE TRANSIT
ORIENTED SCALE DEVELOPMENT.
WE ENVISION THIS TO BE PODIA
STICK OVER A PODIUM READY
PROBABLY UP TO SEVENTY FIVE
FEET COULD POTENTIALLY HAVE A
CONTEXTUAL HEIGHT LIMITATION
BUT PROVIDING A LOT OF NEW
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES ON
CORRIDORS BOTH SIGNIFICANT
TRANSIT CORRIDORS AND CORRIDORS
THAT DON'T HAVE SUPER ROBUST
TRANSIT YET BUT HAVE SOME
TRANSIT ON THEM.
SO THESE ARE AREAS THAT HAVE A
DIVERSITY OF LAND USE TYPES.
CATEGORIES RANGING FROM CURRENT
ARE ONE TO COMMERCIAL TO OTHER
OTHER DISTRICTS AND REPRESENT
STILL THE OPPORTUNITY FOR MIXED
USE HIGHER DENSITY HOUSING IN A
REALLY GREATLY EXPANDED
FOOTPRINT FROM A LOT OF THE
DISTRICTS THAT EXIST THERE.
THEN WE ARE IDENTIFYING A
SERIES OF WHAT WE'RE CALLING
MIXED USE HUBS OF SORT
OF DIFFERENT CHARACTERS THOSE
ARE ROUGHLY THEY ROUGHLY
CORRELATE TO WHAT OUR CURRENT
ONE ZONING IS BUT THEY ACTUALLY
EXPAND THE FOOTPRINT OF OUR
CURRENT DC ONE THE AND WE ARE
ENVISIONING A COUPLE
OF DIFFERENT FLAVORS OR
CHARACTERS OF THESE AREAS TO BE
CLEAR THEY ALL HAVE THE LARGEST
I'M SORRY LET ME GO BACK THERE
ARE SOME EXAMPLES I ENVISION
FOR MIXED USE TRANSITION
CORRIDORS AGAIN THIS IS AREAS
ON CORNERS THAT ARE ZONED A
MULTITUDE OF THINGS AND BEING
CONSOLIDATED HOPEFULLY INTO A
MUCH MORE UNIFORM AND
CONSISTENT AND TYPICAL
OPPORTUNITY FOR HOUSING AS WE
GET INTO SOME OF THESE MIXED
USE HUBS WE SEE THE OPPORTUNITY
FOR DISTINCT CHARACTER THROUGH
SOME OF THESE DISTRICTS
OF THESE AGAIN ROUGHLY
CORRESPOND TO WHAT IS CURRENTLY
ZONE TAKE ONE IN THE CITY AND
AGAIN I SAID IT BUT I ASK YOU
TO TAKE THAT WITH A GRAIN
OF SALT.
WE WERE TALKING ABOUT WHAT THE
CHARACTER OF THESE AREAS WE
DESIRE AND THIS IS ONE PLACE
WHERE I'VE GOING A LITTLE BIT
MORE ROGUE THAN MY CONSULTANT
TEAM IS THAT I THINK THAT WHEN
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT SOME
OF THESE AREAS, PARTICULARLY
THE RETAIL AREAS IN THE
INNOVATION HUB, THIS IS AN AREA
WHERE I AM VERY SENSITIVE ABOUT
OUR SPHERE OF INFLUENCE AND THE
THINGS THAT WE CAN IMPACT AND
THE THINGS THAT WE CAN IMPACT.
AND SO WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
THESE AREAS, THE CONSULTING
TEAM IS IS YOU KNOW, ADVISING
LOOK AND ALL OF THESE ZONES
JUST TO SET THE STAGE WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT A VERY SIMILAR
SCALE OF DEVELOPMENT, PROBABLY
SOME OF THE HIGHEST HEIGHT IN
THE CITY AS THERE CURRENTLY
ZONED ALL USE ALL USES LOUD IN
ALL DISTRICTS BUT THEN WHEN
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A COUPLE
OF THE DISTINCT CATEGORIES THEM
THERE'S SOME QUESTIONS THAT I'D
LIKE SOME FEEDBACK FROM THE
PLANNING COMMISSION ON ONE IS
DOWNTOWN AND THE STATE AND
EISENHAUER CORRIDORS THIS
FEATURE LAND USE MAP IS
IDENTIFYING THEM AS MIXED USE
HUBS OR BASICALLY DOWNTOWN
DISTRICTS.
THE QUESTION IN THAT REGARD IS
DOES THAT CHARACTER SEEM
APPROPRIATE TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION THAT THAT AREA NEAR
BRIARWOOD CURRENTLY ONE A JOB
CENTER WITH A LOT OF PARKING
LOTS BUT NOT A LOT THE OTHER
AMENITIES THAT MAKES A MIXED
USE TWENTY OUR COMMUNITY
PROXIMITY RIGHT THERE SHOULD
THOSE AREAS FEATURE THE SAME
DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL SAME
FORM, SAME USE BETTER THE
INNOVATION CORRIDOR IS AN
OPPORTUNITY TO THINK ABOUT A
UNIQUE PROXIMITY TO THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN NORTH
CAMPUS AND SOME PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT CHANGES IN HOW THE
UNIVERSITY IS THINKING ABOUT
TECH TRANSFER AND INVESTMENT.
THE UNIVERSITY HAS I DON'T
PROFESS TO BE AN EXPERT BUT
HERE'S MY UNDERSTANDING THEY
HAVE GONE FROM MORE OF A TECH
TRANSFER LICENSING APPROACH TO
MORE OF AN INVESTMENT VENTURE
CAPITAL APPROACH AND THEY HAVE
REALLY UP TO THEIR INVESTMENT
IN STARTUPS AND TECHNOLOGIES
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS
AND THEY'RE PROVIDING THEIR
PLAN PROVIDES A LOT OF GROWTH
OPPORTUNITY TO ABSORB A LOT
OF THAT ON CAMPUS.
ABSOLUTELY AND A LOT OF IT ON
NORTH CAMPUS THERE STILL MAY
VERY WELL BE OPPORTUNITIES
WHERE THE UNIQUENESS OF A TAX
INCENTIVE OR JUST SPACE NEEDS
OR OTHER FACTORS MIGHT BE WELL
SUITED TO PROVIDING PRIVATE
SECTOR SPACE FOR THOSE SPACE
THOSE BUSINESSES AND STARTUPS
AND GROWTH SECTORS OFF CAMPUS
AND IN INNOVATION ZONE COULD BE
A WAY THAT WE COULD DO A COUPLE
OF THINGS.
ONE, WE COULD FOLLOW THE CITY'S
ECONOMIC GOALS, INVEST IN
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND FIND
INCENTIVES TO MAKE SURE THAT WE
ARE TAKING WHATEVER STEPS WE
CAN TO CULTIVATE SUPPORT THE
LOCATION OF THOSE BUSINESSES
THAT CAN HAPPEN ABSOLUTELY.
>> THE PIECE THAT I POSE TO YOU
IS LIKE EMPLOYMENT ZONES THAT
WE'VE IDENTIFIED ELSEWHERE ON
THIS MAP RESIDENTAL IS A VERY
SIGNIFICANT MARKET PRESSURE IN
OUR COMMUNITY AND WE NEED
HOUSING AND WE ARE PROPOSING 98
PERCENT OF THE CITY CAN BE IS
ELIGIBLE FOR HOUSING AS WE
TALKED ABOUT THE GROWTH WITHIN
THOSE LAND USE DISTRICTS THAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT LIKELY ARE
GOING TO EXCEED THE CAPACITY TO
REACH THOSE PATTERNS OVER TIME
TOO.
WE WANT TO TAKE THAT LITTLE
WINDOW OF INFLUENCE WHATEVER
SCALE IT IS AND THEN THIS
INNOVATION ZONE ALSO USE LAND
USE AS A WAY TO POTENTIALLY
LIMIT THAT MARKET PRESSURE IN
THAT GEOGRAPHY FOR THAT GOAL.
THAT'S ANOTHER QUESTION I POSED
TO YOU.
>> AND THEN FINALLY WITH RETAIL
NOBODY'S PROFESSING THAT RETAIL
IS PROBABLY THE MOST
ASPIRATIONAL AND USE THESE
RETAIL ZONES.
HOWEVER, ARE AT INTERCHANGES.
THEY'RE LITERALLY AT HIGHWAYS.
THEY PROVIDE A REGIONAL
ECONOMIC BENEFIT AND THROUGH
THE CURRENT ZONING WE HAVE MADE
INCREMENTAL EVOLUTION OF THOSE
THINGS LIKELY MORE CHALLENGING
AND THAT IS FINE.
WE CAN WE CAN TAKE THAT
POSITION WHAT THAT MEANS IS
PROBABLY THE GREATER LIKELIHOOD
IS THAT THOSE WOULD HAVE TO
DECLINE TO SUCH A STATE WHERE
THE ECONOMICS WERE IN PLACE TO
BUY OUT LEASES FOR THE
ECONOMICS TO WORK TO ENVISION
SOMETHING OF A MUCH GREATER
SCALE SIZE TRANSIT ORIENTATION,
PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION THEN
WHAT HOW THEY TYPICALLY EVOLVED
TODAY WHICH IS RETAIL AUTOS
OFTEN AUTO CENTRIC INCREMENTAL
DEVELOPMENT.
>> SO I POSED THE QUESTION TO
YOU IS TAKE ONE OVER THE LAST
THREE YEARS HAS PRETTY MUCH
FROZEN THOSE WE CAN SORT
OF DOUBLE DOWN ON THAT THAT WE
WANT WE'RE GOING TO SORT OF I
WANT TO BE THIS EXTREME BUT WE
CAN WE CAN HOLD THE PERFECT WE
CAN HOLD THE GOOD AT BAY OR THE
SLIGHTLY GOOD AT BAY FOR THE
BENEFIT OF THE REALLY GOOD OR
THE PERFECT.
AND THAT'S THE QUESTION AS IT
RELATES TO RETAIL THOSE RETAIL
CENTERS AT THE INTERCHANGES
ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT WE WANT TO
LOOK FOR FLEXIBILITY AGAIN,
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE A LOT
OF DEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL.
SOME OF THE EXAMPLES THAT WE'VE
INCLUDED PRESENTATION SHOW VERY
SIGNIFICANT SCALE
OF DEVELOPMENT IN THOSE RETAIL
AREAS EXAMPLES.
BUT THAT'S ANOTHER PIECE
OF FEEDBACK WE'RE LOOKING WE'RE
LOOKING FOR.
>> I DON'T SEE THIS SCALE
OF DEVELOPMENT AT THOSE FOR A
VERY LONG TIME AND MAYBE THAT'S
FINE BECAUSE
MAYBE THAT
PROVIDES SOME AFFORDABLE
COMMERCIAL SPACE THAT MIGHT
START BEING DISPLACED IN OTHER
AREAS OF THE CITY FROM HOUSING
DEMAND.
SO BUT THAT'S ANOTHER QUESTION
AGAIN CONSULTANT TEAM AT THERE
RIGHT THERE ON ZOOMIN AND IF
THEY WERE HERE THEY'D BE LIKE
JUST REMEMBER BRETT, THIS
DOESN'T HAVE TO BE A REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK.
IT COULD BE AN INCENTIVE BASED
FRAMEWORK AS WELL.
BUT I POSED THE QUESTION TO YOU
AGAIN DO WE WANT TO PUT OUR
THUMB ON THIS?
IN THIS CASE IT'S ALMOST MORE
DEVELOPMENT FORM.
RELAX SOME OF OUR EXPECTATIONS
THAT WE HAVE THERE NOW OR NOT
AND I'M GUESSING THERE'LL BE
SOME QUESTIONS AND I'LL DO MY
BEST TO ANSWER THEM AFTER THE
PUBLIC.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SOUNDS GOOD.
THANK YOU FOR THAT.
>> IF YOU WANT TO HAVE A SEAT
TO SEAN, FEEL FREE.
ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
PUBLIC HEARING.
>> THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON THIS ITEM.
WE'RE GOING TO FIRST HEAR FROM
THOSE PRESENT AND THEN THE
REMOTE PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK
REMOTELY PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE
ON THE PHONE OR USE THE RAISED
HAND FEATURE ON ZOOME FOR PHONE
ACCESS.
>> PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND ENTER MEETING ID
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX.
CITY STAFF WILL IDENTIFY
CALLERS BY THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF THE PHONE NUMBER OR
BY NAME ON ZOOM YOU'LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN
IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK AND
PLEASE ENSURE THAT YOU'RE IN A
QUIET AREA MUTE ANY BACKGROUND
NOISE FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS.
>> IS THERE ANYONE PRESENT THAT
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME?
RELIEF?
>> HEY CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES WE CAN.
WELCOME.
SO I THINK THIS PLAN IS JUST A
FEW IMPORTANT CHANGES AWAY FROM
BEING GREAT BUT THERE ARE SOME
CRITICAL CHANGES THAT SHOULD BE
MADE AND I THINK THE MOST
IMPORTANT IS TO REMOVE THE
THREE DISTRICTS THAT RESTRICT
OR FORBID HOUSING AND I'M GOING
TO FOCUS ON EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT
WHICH IS AFTER THE THANK YOU IN
THE PRESENTATION.
IT IS AN IMPORTANT DISTRICT AND
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT FIRST
BECAUSE IT FORBIDS HOUSING
ENTIRELY AND ALSO BECAUSE IT'S
VERY LARGE.
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY FOUR ACRES
IS MORE THAN TWICE THE SIZE
OF THE D ONE D TWO DISTRICTS
DOWNTOWN AND IT'S 19 TIMES THE
SIZE OF THE PROPOSED AABA S
DEVELOPMENT WHICH WOULD ADD A
THOUSAND UNITS OF HOUSING PLUS
RETAIL PLUS COMMERCIAL.
SO THERE'S AN OPPORTUNITY TO
ALLOW FOR THOUSANDS OF UNITS
OF HOUSING AND S ANN ARBOR ALSO
HAS AN OPPORTUNITY TO ATTRACT
EMPLOYERS BY ALLOWING HOUSING
IN POST COVID REMOTE WORK
FRIENDLY AMERICA TODAY IT'S
HARD TO ATTRACT OFFERS ONLY
WE'RE RESEARCH ONLY DEVELOPMENT
RESIDENTIAL CAN BE THE
DIFFERENCE WHAT MAKES A
DEVELOPMENT FINANCIALLY
FEASIBLE SO YOU CAN ATTRACT
JOBS AND HOUSING AT THE SAME
TIME AND I KNOW THERE'S A
COUNTERARGUMENT THAT WE DON'T
REALLY NEED TO WORRY ABOUT
HOUSING BECAUSE WE'RE GOING TO
GET A MINIMUM OF THIRTY
THOUSAND UNITS IN THESE OTHER
AREAS.
BUT WE'VE ALLOWED HOUSING ON
OUR COMMERCIAL CORRIDORS FOR
DECADES AND IN MANY OF THEM
THERE'S BEEN LITTLE TO NO
HOUSING BUILT.
SO WE NEED TO ALLOW HOUSING IN
AREAS THAT CURRENTLY DOES NOT
ALLOW HOUSING IF WE EXPECT TO
GET MORE AND I KNOW THERE'S
ALSO CONCERN ABOUT PRESERVING
INDUSTRIAL SPACE BUT KEEP IN
MIND TWENTY FIVE HUNDRED NEW
ACRES ARE NOW OPEN TO
RESPONSIBLE LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
USE THAT WERE PREVIOUSLY ONLY
RESIDENTIAL.
>> ALL THESE MIXED USE
TRANSITION SPOKES ON MAPLE AND
MILLER TO HERE ON THESE ARE ALL
NEW PLACES TO ALLOW LIGHT
INDUSTRIAL SO WE DON'T NEED TO
EXCLUDE HOUSING FROM SOUTH
INDUSTRIAL AND RESEARCH PARK SO
PLEASE BRING UP THE EMPLOYMENT
DISTRICT TONIGHT.
IT'S REALLY CRITICAL AND I KNOW
IT WASN'T ONE OF THE QUESTIONS
BUT YOUR ROLE IS MORE THAN JUST
ANSWERING QUESTIONS HERE.
CO CREATORS OF THIS PLAN AND I
THINK YOU HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY
TO HELP A LOT PEOPLE IN THE
CITY BY BRINGING UP THAT
EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> WELL, JUST TO NOTE THAT THAT
PODIUM RAISES SO NOT EVERYBODY
HAS THE CROWD TO HIGHLIGHT.
YEAH, HI MY NAME IS GABE
GROSSMAN.
>> I I'M A STUDENT AND I LIVE
IN THE OLD FOURTH WARD.
I WOULD MAKE TWO SUGGESTIONS TO
MAKE SUGGESTIONS.
THE FIRST ONE IS AROUND THE
TRANSIT CORRIDOR.
I THINK THOSE TRANSIT CORRIDORS
ARE WAY TOO NARROW AND IT'S
KIND LEADING TO IT'S GOING TO
LEAD TO BAD TRANSIT, HIGH
GRADIENTS BECAUSE OF HOW YEAH.
NARROW IT IS.
AND INSTEAD OF YOU GUYS WANTING
TO EXPAND THAT OUTWARD AND
SAYING HEY, WE CAN BUILD OUT
MORE IN THAT DIRECTION, IT
SEEMS WISE.
>> OH SORRY YOU GUYS ARE
PUSHING IN THE OPPOSITE
DIRECTION WHERE IT IS
SHORTENING THAT HEIGHT LIMIT IT
SEEMS LIKE AROUND THOSE TRANSIT
CORRIDORS.
THE NEXT PART IS ABOUT THE OLD
FOURTH WARD WHERE I LIVE IT
SEEMS I KNOW IT'S UNDER
HISTORIC PRESERVATION BUT I
WOULD LIKE TO SEE IT ALLOW FOR
MORE USES UNDER THIS
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
I LIVE THERE AND I HAVE A LOT
OF FRIENDS THAT LIVE THERE.
I'VE BEEN TO PLENTY OF HOUSES
AND THEY ARE MAINLY JUST
SLUMLORD OWNED HOUSES THAT I
MEAN THERE ARE A FEW VERY NICE
MANICURED LAWNS VIOMYCIN PROF'S
SOMETHING AND THAT NEIGHBORHOOD
BUT I MAYBE NOT PROF'S PEOPLE
WITH PLENTY OF MONEY BUT I
THINK THERE THERE THERE ARE A
LOT OF HOUSES WHERE WE WOULD
LIKE TO SEE A STUDENTS THAT IS
A KEY NEIGHBORHOOD THAT'S NEAR
THE UNIVERSITY, IT'S NEAR A LOT
OF CAMPUSES AND JUST TO SEE
THAT SORT OF SHUT DOWN TO THE
LOWEST LEVEL OF DEVELOPMENT IS
SAD.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
YES
.
JONATHAN LEVINE FOUR FIVE SIX
HILDALE WHEN CITIES AND
JURISDICTIONS STARTED
ELIMINATING SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING IN TWENTY SIXTEEN I WAS
EXCITED BEYOND BELIEF.
I THOUGHT THIS WAS THE MOST
EXCITING THING THAT HAD
HAPPENED IN MY CAREER AND
THAT'S A NO BRAINER.
WE HAVE TO DO THAT AND YET THE
EXPERIENCE TELLS US THAT THOSE
AREN'T THE PLACES THAT ACTUALLY
DELIVER THE HOUSING THE PLACES
THAT DELIVER THE HOUSING ARE
THE PLACES THAT OFFER ACTUAL
HIGH DENSITY ON MAJOR CORRIDORS
SO WE CAN WE CAN AND SHOULD
SWITCH OUR SINGLE FAMILY ZONE
TO THE LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT.
BUT WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE'RE MORE AMENABLE ON OUR
MAJOR CORRIDORS THEN THEN WE
CURRENTLY ARE TO HOUSING.
SO LET'S TALK ABOUT OUR MAJOR
CORRIDORS, THE ONES I WANT TO
FOCUS ON ARE S STATE S
INDUSTRIAL WASHTENAW, PLYMOUTH
NORTH MAIN AND WEST STADIUM IN
TWO OF THOSE CORRIDORS I FEEL
LIKE WE'RE WE'RE DOING WELL
WITH THESE PLANS.
WE'VE CHANGED NORTH MAIN TO
FROM FROM INDUSTRIAL TO MID
RISE RESIDENTIAL A STEP FORWARD
SOUTH SOUTH STATE.
WE KEEP IT AS AMENABLE AS IT
CURRENTLY IS TO HOUSING.
THE OTHERS ARE ACTUALLY LESS
AMENABLE TO HOUSING THAN THEY
CURRENTLY ARE UNDER OUR CURRENT
ZONING.
SO THAT GOES FOR THE RETAIL
AREAS OF WASHTENAW AND A
STADIUM THAT REQUIRE GROUND
FLOOR RETAIL IN RESIDENTIAL
BUILDINGS.
UNDER THE CURRENT PLAN GROUND
GROUND FLOOR RETAIL IS A VERY
HARD SELL CURRENTLY AND GROUND
FLOOR REQUIRING GROUND FLOOR
RETAIL WOULD BE QUITE AN
IMPEDIMENT.
THE REQUIRING 30 PERCENT ONLY
30 PERCENT OF THE BUILDINGS IN
OUR INNOVATION DISTRICT TO BE
RESIDENTIAL IS ANOTHER
SIGNIFICANT RESTRICTION.
SO IN MANY WAYS I FEEL LIKE ON
OUR MAJOR CORRIDORS WE'RE GOING
IN THE OPPOSITE DIRECTION.
WE HAVE STATED GOALS TO
ALLEVIATE THE HOUSING CRISIS IN
ANN ARBOR AND IN FOUR OUT
OF THE SIX WE'RE NOT DOING SO
WELL.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
IS THERE ANYONE ELSE THAT WOULD
LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME?
MR. ROBUSTO MR. WHATFOR WELCOME
.
THANK YOU.
HOW DOES THIS GO UP JUST OH
HERE WE GO.
IT'S BEEN A MINUTE I TRIED IT
THE OTHER NIGHT IF IT'S NOT
WORKING WELL.
OH YEAH I'LL STOOP CARQUEST FOR
THREE FIVE OH FIVE CHARTER
PLACE.
THANKS FOR DISCUSSION TONIGHT
I'D LIKE TO ENCOURAGE YOU TO
APPROACH THIS CONVERSATION
PERHAPS BY ASKING WHERE DO I
WANT TO SAY THAT WE SHOULD
RESTRICT HOUSING?
IT FEELS LIKE YOU'RE BEING
PRESENTED THIS DOCUMENT AND YOU
WERE KIND OF GOING OFF IN
CERTAIN DIRECTIONS FROM THERE.
I THINK DURING A LOT OF THE
PUBLIC MEETINGS YOU SAW AN
OUTPOURING OF PEOPLE WHO, YOU
KNOW, PUT DOTS ON PAPER AND
MADE COMMENTS THAT WE SHOULD
ALLOW MORE HOUSING EVERYWHERE,
EXPAND THE DOWNTOWN AND IT
SEEMS LIKE I DON'T KNOW WHAT
WHAT HAPPENED TO THOSE IDEAS.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE FIVE FOOT
INCREASE THAT'S BEING FLOATED
FOR THE PLURALITY OF CITY LAND
LAND ARE ONE IN TWO ONLY GOING
UP TO THIRTY FIVE FROM THIRTY
FROM WHAT I HEARD FROM THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN COMMITTEE IT
SOUNDED LIKE THERE WAS A
CONSENSUS AROUND FORTY EIGHT
AND OBVIOUSLY THIS DOESN'T MEAN
THAT YOU COULD BUILD FORTY
EIGHT FEET RIGHT NEXT ON YOUR
PROPERTY LINE LIKE THERE'S WAYS
OF STEPPING THAT BACK AND AND
MAKING THAT MORE YOU KNOW
GENTLE RELATIVE TO OTHER
PARCELS BUT I'M WONDERING WHY
THAT THAT ISN'T BEING
CONSIDERED HERE.
I'M ALSO PUZZLED AS HAS BEEN
SAID BEFORE ABOUT THE
RESTRICTIONS AND PROHIBITIONS
ON HOUSING THAT HAVE BEEN
FLOATED IN THE PAST TWO
VERSIONS.
I
WOULD ASK JUST TO KEEP
COUNCIL'S DIRECTIVE TO EXPAND
HOUSING POSSIBILITIES AND NOT
IMPOSE MANDATES LIKE OFFICE AND
RETAIL.
MY LAST CONCERN IS THE
TRANSITION ZONE THAT WAS
CREATED BY THE CONSULTANT.
NOT ONLY DOES IT WRITE DOWN
ZONES, SOME AREAS WHICH I
ELUCIDATED IN MY MEMO THAT ARE
ALREADY ONE I JUST I JUST DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHY THE CONSULTANT
WANTED IT BREAK APART WHAT I
THINK IS AN EXCELLENT ZONE ONE
ITSELF ADJUSTS TO ITS LOW RISE
NEIGHBORS.
THEY'RE PROPOSING BREAKING OUT
HUB AND TRANSIT AND SPREADING
THIS TRANSITION OVER BLOCKS AND
BLOCKS HUNDREDS OF ACRES
OF LAND AS OPPOSED TO LETTING
STUFF BE HIGH DENSITY AND THEN
QUICKLY TAPER DOWN TO THE
NEIGHBORS.
IT'S ALMOST GIVING NEIGHBORS
LICENSE TO SAY I DON'T WANT
HIGH DENSITY NOT JUST THE NEXT
BLOCK OR NEXT TO ME BUT FOR
BLOCKS AND BLOCKS AWAY I JUST
WOULD LIKE SOME TO HEAR SOME
JUSTIFICATION FOR WHY SO MUCH
IS ZONED IN THIS 50 TO 80 FOOT
HEIGHT IT WOULD MAKE FIVE
CORNERS NONCONFORMING.
I THINK IT WOULD MAKE BEEKMAN
NONCONFORMING.
I JUST I STRUGGLED WITH THAT
SORT OF STRANGE LOW HIGH RISE
ZONE ALSO I THINK TRANSITION IS
GOING TO BE A DIFFICULT SELL IN
SOME AREAS LIKE MILLER JUST
BECAUSE IT'S THE ONLY INSTANCE
WHERE YOU'RE SPLITTING OUR ONE
PARCELS INTO LOW RISE AND
TRANSITION AND I JUST DON'T
THINK IT'S WORTH THE FIGHT AND
I'M NOT SURE YOU'RE GOING TO
GET A LOT OUT OF IT.
THANK YOU.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
THAT I'D LIKE TO SPEAK?
YES, HELLO.
TRY THIS ONE MORE TIME NOW I
CAN ONLY MAKE IT GO LOWER.
OH I'M PRESSING AND LIFTING
SIMULTANEOUSLY.
I DON'T KNOW HOW YOU'RE RIGHT.
YOU'RE SO ANYWAY MY NAME IS JIM
PIKE.
I LIVE IN NINE TWELVE PAMONA
ROAD AND I SEE THE TIMER
STARTED AWESOME.
I HAVE BEEN IN FAVOR FOLLOWING
THE RECENTLY ENDED BIDEN
ADMINISTRATION'S RECOMMENDATION
TO REDUCE OR ELIMINATE
EXCLUSIONARY SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING THROUGHOUT THE UNITED
STATES SINCE BEFORE THAT
ADMINISTRATION MADE THAT
RECOMMENDATION I WANT TO
EMPHASIZE THE WORD EXCLUSIONARY
IN THAT PHRASE BECAUSE I THINK
SOME MAYBE EVEN MANY PEOPLE
HEAR THE PHRASE ELIMINATE
SINGLE FAMILY ZONING AND
IMMEDIATELY HAVE VISIONS
OF PEOPLE BEING FORCED FROM THE
DETACHED SINGLE FAMILY HOUSES
THEY CURRENTLY LIVE IN TO BE
HERDED INTO FEATURELESS 50
STOREY CONCRETE APARTMENT
BLOCKS ADDING THE WORD
EXCLUSIONARY, HOWEVER, MAKES
THE PHRASE INTO A BOTH AND
STATEMENT INSTEAD OF AN EITHER
OR ONE.
>> IF WE LIBERALIZE RESIDENTIAL
ZONING SO THAT IT'S ACCEPTABLE
MAYBE EVEN SOMEHOW INCENTIVIZED
TO BUILD SOME MULTIFAMILY
BUILDINGS MIXED INTO
NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE DETACHED
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSES
PREDOMINATE, THEN WE CREATE
MORE OPPORTUNITIES FOR MORE
HOUSING THAT MORE PEOPLE CAN
POTENTIALLY AFFORD.
I WANT TO SEE MORE AND TALLER
HOUSING STRUCTURES DOWNTOWN AND
ALONG TRANSIT CORRIDORS AND I
WANT ANN ARBOR TO ELIMINATE
EXCLUSIONARY SINGLE FAMILY
ZONING SO THAT WE HAVE A
BROADER RANGE OF OPTIONS FOR
NEW HOUSING HERE MORE OPTIONS
ARE BETTER THAN FEWER WHEN
PEOPLE ARE HOUSE HUNTING AND A
LOT OF PEOPLE ARE HOUSE HUNTING
.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
WHO SIR WHERE IS THIS UP A
LITTLE BIT MORE POSSIBLY NOT.
I'M NOT SURE NOW ANYWAYS.
MY NAME IS MAX GIBBS ROOMMATE.
I LIVE AT SEVEN TO TWO.
HE'S KINGSLEE ALSO THANK YOU
FOR HAVING US.
I JUST WANT TO SAY I WAS A
LITTLE BIT SURPRISED WHEN I
FIRST SAW THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND THAT OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
OR 34TH WARD ISN'T SEEING ANY
CHANGE.
I THOUGHT IT WAS REALLY
SURPRISING BECAUSE LIVING THERE
IT IS I GUESS A HISTORIC
DISTRICT BUT I THINK THE
PRESERVATION OF IT IN THAT WAY
THERE'S A LOT OF EMPHASIS ON
THE OLD PART OF THE OLD FOURTH
WARD BECAUSE IT'S BECOMING
HONESTLY DECREPIT I THINK IS
THE FIRST WORD THAT COMES TO
MIND.
I WOULD INVITE ANY OF YOU TO
COME OVER TO OUR HOUSE IF YOU
WOULD LIKE A LITTLE TOUR OF THE
BASEMENT, DESCRIBE IT MORE
OF SAND CASTLE TEXTURE THAN
WATER.
AND I KNOW A LOT OF MY MY
NEIGHBORS STUDENTS HAVE A
SIMILAR SITUATION.
SO I WOULD JUST IMPLORE YOU ALL
TO ADD THAT LITTLE BUBBLE
OF SINGLE FAMILY ZONE THAT IS
FOR SOME REASON GOING UNTOUCHED
INTO THE REALM OF STUFF WE'RE
LOOKING AT IMPROVING RENEWING,
REVITALIZING, STRENGTHENING
BECAUSE AS MUCH AS WE LOVE THE
LOOK OF THESE OLD BUILDINGS AND
I CAN'T ALWAYS AGREE WITH THAT
BECAUSE FROM THE OUTSIDE
THEY'RE THEY'RE AGING AS WELL I
THINK IT'S MORE IMPORTANT THAT
THE PEOPLE THAT LIVE THERE HAVE
GOOD LIVING CONDITIONS AND
DON'T HAVE TO WORRY ABOUT LEAKS
AND WORRY ABOUT FLORIDA'S
CRACKING AND WORRY ABOUT HOW
MUCH THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
PAY UNDER UTILITY BILL BECAUSE
AS GABE AND I KNOW, OUR FRONT
DOOR IS MORE OF AN AIR
CONDITIONER THIS TIME OF THE
YEAR THAN AN ENTRANCE.
SO I WOULD JUST ASK THAT YOU
TAKE INTO ACCOUNT THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD I THERE ARE SOME
GOOD BUILDINGS THERE BUT I
THINK TOTALLY EXCLUDING IT FROM
ANY SORT OF UPGRADES AND
DEVELOPMENT IS IS PROBABLY A
MISTAKE AND ESPECIALLY IN SUCH
A NICE PART OF TOWN WHERE MORE
PEOPLE WANT TO LIVE.
THANK YOU.
YES.
I AM MATTHEW OSTROSKY TWO NINE
FOUR FOUR BERTSCH DRIVE.
I JUST KIND OF WANTED TO GO OFF
WHAT KIRK WAS GOING OFF OF .
I'M NOT REALLY LIKE
KNOWLEDGEABLE ON ALL DETAILS
OF PLANNING AND EVERYTHING.
I DON'T GIVE YOU PERSPECTIVE
SOMEONE WHO SOLD THEIR CAR
RECENTLY AND BIKES AROUND AND
ALSO I WAS IN A RECENT ACCIDENT
INVOLVING A CAR AND I HAVE TO
WALK AND I WALK AND BUS ROUND.
I DON'T THINK HAVING YOU KNOW,
ALL OF THESE DIFFERENT ZONING
DISTRICTS IS REALLY LIKE, YOU
KNOW, A SMART MOVE AS SOMEONE
WHO LIKE YOU KNOW FOR EXAMPLE,
YOU KNOW, WHEN I TAKE THE BUS
UP TO TO WORK I HAVE A TICKET
TRANSFER AND IT'S NOT ALWAYS,
YOU KNOW, FEASIBLE FOR ME TO OR
CONVENIENT FOR ME TO HAVE TO
YOU KNOW, DO THAT, YOU KNOW
WHAT I MEAN?
SO WHEN I AM WHAT I'M TRYING TO
SAY IS THAT IN THESE LIKE IF WE
HAVE LIKE THESE OFFICE OWNING
DISTRICTS AND LIKE ALL THESE
THINGS IS GOING TO MAKE IT
HARDER FOR PEOPLE TO GET PLACES
AND IT'S NOT GOING TO REALLY
INCENTIVIZE THEM TO USE TRANSIT
TO USE YOU KNOW, THE BIKE
AROUND BECAUSE IN REALITY
PEOPLE WANT TO GET PLACES, YOU
KNOW, CONVENIENTLY FAST AND
WHATNOT AND YEAH, JUST KIND
OF LIKE PERSPECTIVE, YOU KNOW,
AS SOMEONE WHO'S BEEN OVERSEAS,
YOU KNOW, I'VE BEEN TO JAPAN I
OFTEN GIVE THE EXAMPLE I BIKED
AND TOOK TRAINS IN JAPAN AND I
NEVER BIKE MORE THAN THREE
MILES ONE WAY AND THEN THOSE
THREE MILES YOU WOULD ENCOUNTER
COFFEE SHOPS, ARCADES HERE, YOU
KNOW, BIKING TWO MILES YOU'RE
GOING TO ENCOUNTER SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES AND YOU KNOW IT
TAKES EVEN LONGER WALKING.
SO IF WE'RE SEPARATING THINGS
OUT AND IT IT ALMOST FEELS LIKE
IT'S MORE RESTRICTIVE THAN THE
CURRENT ZONING PROPOSAL.
SO I THINK HAVING YOU KNOW,
OBVIOUSLY MORE DENSIFICATION
BUT ALSO JUST REALLY LIMITING
HOW MANY ZONING DISTRICTS WE
HAVE.
MY FAVORITE COFFEE SHOP IS
RIGHT RUTH'S CAFE I BELIEVE
IT'S CALLED IT'S IN THE ONE
OF THE NEIGHBORHOODS IN THE
SOUTH INDUSTRIAL IT TAKES ME
LIKE ALMOST FORTY MINUTES TO
WALK THERE AND I MEAN IT'S
MOSTLY THROUGH SINGLE FAMILY
HOME AREAS AND I GOT ACROSS
EISENHOWER AND AND YOU KNOW IT
DOESN'T FEEL SAFE CROSSING THAT
ROAD.
NO ONE WALKING IN NUMBER TWO I
MEAN IT'S A 40 MINUTE WALK SO
THERE WERE MORE LIKE PLACES TO
GO.
I FEEL LIKE THAT WOULD BE
BETTER FOR THE COMMUNITY AND
ALSO, YOU KNOW, JUST HAVING
MORE THINGS NEARBY WITHIN
WALKING DISTANCE, NOT HAVING
YOU TRANSIT CORRIDORS WITH ONLY
HOUSING AND SEPARATING
EVERYTHING OUT LIKE FEELS IS
GOING TO MAKE THINGS WORSE.
SO YEAH, THANK YOU MATTHEW
.
>> OH HI.
HELLO.
WELCOME.
THANK I'M I'M DENHA.
I ALSO LIVE IN THE OLD FOURTH
WARD.
I WORK AT U OF THEM I'M SORRY
I'M A LITTLE SHY BUT I WANTED
TO SUPPORT OR EXPRESS MY
SUPPORT FOR NOT RESTRICTING
RESIDENTIAL AREAS ANYWHERE I'VE
BEEN RENTING HERE FOR THE LAST
SIX OR SEVEN YEARS SO I'M
EXPERIENCING FIRSTHAND HOW
SEVERE THE HOUSING CRISIS IS
RIGHT NOW.
PEOPLE ARE SO INSANELY
DESPERATE FOR HOUSING.
I HAVE SO MANY THINGS THAT I
COULD SAY ABOUT THIS.
I MYSELF HAVE DONE SOME VERY
DESPERATE THINGS TO ASSURE THAT
I HAVE HOUSING.
I'VE SLEPT CLOSETS OF MY
ROOMMATES ROOMS EVEN WHEN I'M
ON THE LEASE FOR THAT APARTMENT
I'VE RENTED PLACES THAT ARE
DESIGNED TO BE LIVABLE THAT ARE
CRUMBLING, THAT STILL COST
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS A MONTH TO
LIVE IN AND NO MATTER HOW
ATROCIOUS THE CONDITIONS, THE
RENT STILL GOES UP EVERY SINGLE
YEAR.
IT STILL COSTS WAY TOO MUCH
BECAUSE THE THE DEMAND IS SO
HIGH LIKE HOUSING IS SO SCARCE
AND THAT MEANS THAT ME AND
MANY, MANY OTHER PEOPLE
I KNOW
HAVE TO MOVE APARTMENTS EVERY
SINGLE YEAR.
I'VE LIVED IN A NEW APARTMENT
EVERY SINGLE YEAR THAT I'VE
LIVED IN ANN ARBOR LIKE I'VE
MOVED TO A DIFFERENT PLACE
BECAUSE THE PRICES KEEP PUSHING
ME OUT WHICH ALSO MEANS THAT ME
LIKE PEOPLE LIKE ME ARE
HOMELESS FOR TWO WEEKS OUT
OF EVERY SINGLE YEAR WHEN WE'RE
SWITCHING LEASES BECAUSE
THERE'S NO LEASE OVERLAP
BECAUSE OF THE WAY LIKE ALL
THESE LEASES ARE BECAUSE
OF LIKE THE STUDENT SCHEDULES.
AND SO SOME OF MY COWORKERS
THEY TAKE A DIFFERENT APPROACH.
THEY KNOW THEY CAN'T FIND
HOUSING HERE SO THEY COMMUTE
SEVERAL HOURS OUT AND THEY COME
HERE TWO HOURS BEFORE THEIR
SHIFT SHIRTS.
THEY SLEEP IN THEIR CAR LIKE
BOTH UNTIL THEIR SHIFT STARTS
LIKE FREEZING PARKING STRUCTURE
BECAUSE THEY THEY KNOW THEY
CAN'T FIND PARKING EVEN WITH A
PARKING PASS THAT THEY PAY FOR
AND THEY KNOW THEY CAN'T FIND
HOUSING HERE.
AND I'M SORRY TO BRING UP ALL
THESE PERSONAL ANECDOTES BUT I
BRING THESE UP BECAUSE THE
CONSULTANTS HAVE SOME CONCERNS
WITH ALLOWING HOUSING
EVERYWHERE SPECIFICALLY WHAT I
WHAT STUCK WITH ME WAS THEY
SAID DO WE RISK A REVERSE
COMMUTE AS JOBS ARE FORCED OUT
OF THE CITY AND LOSE GROUND ON
THE GOAL OF REDUCING VEHICLE
MILES TRAVELED AND I JUST HAVE
TO SAY IN RESPONSE TO THIS LIKE
EIGHTY THOUSAND PLUS PEOPLE
COMMUTE INTO ANN ARBOR FOR OUR
JOBS.
WE HAVE NOT EVEN COME REMOTELY
CLOSE TO PROVIDING THE AMOUNT
OF HOUSING NEED IT FOR ALL
THESE PEOPLE AND NOT EVEN
INCLUDING PEOPLE LIKE ME WHO
ALREADY LIVE HERE WHERE HOUSING
IS DEFINITELY NOT ENOUGH TO GO
AROUND.
S INDUSTRIAL IN PARTICULAR WAS
MARKED AS AN AREA TO NOT ALLOW
HOUSING.
BUT I THINK IT'S AN IDEAL PLACE
TO HAVE HOUSING.
IT'S IT'S NEAR CAMPUS.
IT'S NEAR OTHER LIKE RETAIL
VENUES.
IT'S ON MAJOR BUS ROUTES.
IT'S ON A BUS ROUTE THAT I TAKE
EVERY SINGLE DAY DOWN TO THE
INDUSTRIAL.
SO ALL THIS TO SAY PLEASE
REMOVE THE EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT
OR LIKE ANY DISTRICT THAT LIKE
RESTRICT HOUSING.
I KNOW MAYBE THIS WASN'T
SUPPOSED TO BE THE AGENDA ITEM.
I DON'T REALLY KNOW HOW TO DO
THIS BUT I JUST WANTED TO
EXPRESS THIS LIKE AS A LONG
TIME RENTER.
>> YEAH.
PLEASE DON'T RESTRICT HOUSING
ANYWHERE.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
HELLO.
HEY THERE.
I AM SO THANK YOU FOR HAVING US
TONIGHT.
MY NAME SAMAT KEUSCH.
I MOVED TO TOWN SIX MONTHS AGO
NOW FROM PORTLAND, OREGON AND
SO I'VE ONLY REALLY KIND
OF STARTED PAYING ATTENTION TO
URBAN POLICY MORE RECENTLY BUT
FINDING IT REALLY INTERESTING I
LOVE THAT YOUTUBE CHANNEL CITY
NERD AND SO MEETING PEOPLE
AROUND TOWN AND MEETING PEOPLE
WHO WANT TO TALK ABOUT THIS HAS
BEEN REALLY COOL AND I'VE BEEN
LEARNING ABOUT THE MASTER PLAN
,THE PROGRESS AND I THINK IT'S
REALLY EXCITING AND I PROBABLY
JUST WANT TO ECHO A LOT OF WHAT
PEOPLE HAVE SAID ALREADY AROUND
HOUSING, HOUSING, HOUSING.
I MEAN I THINK WE ALL
UNDERSTAND THE NEED AND ECHOING
I GUESS SOME OF THE IDEAS
SIMPLIFICATION IT REALLY SEEMS
LIKE WE NEED TO MAKE I GUESS
DEVELOPMENT AS EASY AS
POSSIBLE.
I WORK IN ENERGY AND DEFINITELY
NAVIGATING THE RULES AROUND
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS
REALLY, REALLY CHALLENGING.
SO FIGURING OUT WAYS TO MAKE
THOSE TYPES OF THINGS HAPPEN
MUCH MORE QUICKLY.
REALLY IMPORTANT OF COURSE.
AND SO YEAH, I MEAN I CAN'T
SPEAK IN DETAIL ABOUT ALL
OF THESE TOPICS TONIGHT BUT
WHATEVER IT TAKES TO MAKE MORE
HOUSING HAPPEN MORE QUICKLY FOR
MORE PEOPLE, I THINK THAT'S
REALLY, REALLY IMPORTANT.
>> SO THANK YOU
.
>> YES.
NO PLEASE COME UP.
YEAH.
THANK YOU MATT.
WELCOME TAMARA.
THANK YOU.
HI.
ELISE MCCOY 514 LAWRENCE I'M
VERY EXCITED TO SEE THE MOVE
TOWARDS MORE MIXED USE WITH IN
ANN ARBOR.
I'VE LIVED HERE FOR MOST OF MY
LIFE THOUGH I'VE TAKEN OTHER
YEARS IN LARGER CITIES AND LIKE
BOSTON AND DETROIT AND SO I'M
EXCITED TO SEE MORE MIXED USE
COME HERE.
I WANT TO JUST TO SPEAK A
LITTLE BIT TO THE SOUTH
INDUSTRIAL CORRIDOR BEFORE I
MOVED TO THE OLD FOURTH WARD I
LIVED AT EAST PARK PLACE AND
ROSE WHICH IS LIKE A BLOCK AWAY
FROM WHERE PARK PLACE BECOMES S
INDUSTRIAL AND WHEN I LIVED
THERE I WALKED TO A LOT OF THE
BUSINESSES IN S INDUSTRIAL
LUCKIES WHEN IT WAS LUCKIES
CVS'S BY THE POUND SALVACION
ARMY PRODUCES A LOT OF THEM AND
THAT WAS PART OF THE REASON
THAT MY FAMILY MOVED TO THAT
PART OF BERN'S PARK WAS BECAUSE
EVEN THOUGH IT WAS LIKE
DIRECTLY RESIDENTIAL RIGHT
AROUND US, WE COULD CROSS OVER
INTO A MORE WALKABLE AREA AND I
THINK THAT OTHER PEOPLE WOULD
BENEFIT FROM BEING ABLE TO WALK
TO THOSE BUSINESSES TO MEET
THEIR DAILY NEEDS.
PARTICULARLY I WALK TO THE
SALVATION ARMY A LOT A FEW
TIMES I JOG DOWN TO THE PTO
THRIFT SHOP BEING ABLE TO HAVE
LIKE SECOND HAND STORES LIKE
MORE AFFORDABLE PLACES
AVAILABLE ON FOOT WAS REALLY
BENEFICIAL.
I THINK IT WOULD ALSO BENEFIT
THOSE BUSINESSES TO HAVE MORE
PEOPLE THAT ARE LIVING NEAR TO
THEM.
I DON'T THINK YOU'RE GOING TO
GET THAT UNLESS YOU ALLOW
HOUSING WITHIN THAT CORRIDOR.
ONLY SO MANY PEOPLE ARE GOING
TO CROSS OVER STADIUM TO WALK
INTO THAT AREA.
IT'S A LITTLE PROHIBITIVE BUT
IF YOU HAD PEOPLE LIVING RIGHT
THERE THEY COULD FREQUENT THOSE
BUSINESSES LIKE ONE THAT COMES
TO MIND.
I STILL GO TO THE PEDIATRICIAN
.
THAT PARKING LOT IS TIGHT.
IT'S HARD TO GET IN THERE.
I THINK IT WOULD BENEFIT THEM
IF PEOPLE COULD ACCESS IT ON
FOOT.
>> THANK YOU.
HELLO.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M BRIAN CHAMBERS LIVE IN THE
THIRD WARD TO ONE VOTE.
NO WAY.
THERE'S A NUMBER OF PLANNERS ON
THE PLANNING COMMISSION I THINK
THAT'S FANTASTIC.
THERE'S A NUMBER OF PLANNERS IN
THE AUDIENCE HERE.
I HAVE A PLANNING DEGREE FROM
1986 FROM THE MASTERS PROGRAM
HERE AND A DOCTORATE IN
PLANNING.
WE'RE ALL PLANNING
PROFESSIONALS TO A GREATER
DEGREE.
I REALLY APPRECIATE AND AS THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WAS
UNFOLDING AND I WAS MEETING
WITH THE PROJECT TEAMS AND
LISTENING TO ALL OF THE HUBBUB
AROUND IT, I WAS GREATLY
ENCOURAGED AND I WAS THINKING
THIS IS AN A PLUS ALL OF THE
PLANS COMING FORWARD WAS LIKE
FANTASTIC AND THEN IN THE FALL
IT'S LIKE IT CHANGED.
BRITAIN TALKED ABOUT A CHANGE
IN THE FALL.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT THE
ESCALATING EVENT WAS OR THAT
CRITICAL EVENT WAS BUT NOW IT'S
IT'S AS IF THERE'S A
STAKEHOLDER GROUP THAT THAT'S
HERE BUT NOT HERE.
I DON'T KNOW WHO WE'RE
NEGOTIATING WITH ANYMORE.
I'M NOT SURE THAT WE'VE
MAINTAINED OUR BACKBONE
NECESSARILY.
I THINK YOU'RE GOING TO COMBINE
OUR ONE IN OUR TWO.
I THINK THAT'S ALMOST A
FOREGONE CONCLUSION.
BUT YOU SEEM TO THE PROJECT
SEEMS TO BACKPEDAL A LITTLE BIT
ON SOME OF THE VISION FOR
INCREASING THE SCALE OF HOUSING
FOR OLD ANN ARBOR.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT CHANGE THAT
MAYBE RETAILERS THAT OWN UP ON
MAPLE, YOU KNOW, BECAUSE THERE
WAS A HUBBUB IN DC ONE WHEN I
GOT THERE AND THE 40 YEAR
LEASES AND EVERYTHING ELSE AND
ALL OF A SUDDEN, OH, WE CAN'T
DO THAT WELL WE PROBABLY
SHOULDN'T DO IT THEN FOR THE
INNOVATION DISTRICTS PROBABLY
SHOULDN'T DO THAT FOR
EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS AND ALL
OF A SUDDEN YOU'RE BACKPEDALING
WHERE HAPPENED TO THE VISION
OF A WALKABLE ANN ARBOR
MIXED-USE TRANSIT ORIENTED
BASED ANN ARBOR?
I'M MISSING IT IN THE PLAN
RIGHT NOW.
I REALLY WANT TO BE ENCOURAGING
I'M GRADING THE CURRENT PLAN A
B I HAVE AN ACADEMIC BACKGROUND
WITH GOOD GRADES RIGHT GRADES.
SO YOU'RE GOING TO BE I THINK A
LOT OF PEOPLE WE'RE HERE WE'RE
THINKING WOW, THIS IS ALL
LOOKING REALLY GOOD BUT I HAVE
THESE CONCERNS AND THOSE
CONCERNS THAT'S A LOT OF RED
LINES ON THE ON THE PAPER.
SO I'M REALLY ENCOURAGING YOU
TO DO SOMETHING DIFFERENT.
IT'S STRONG FEEDBACK.
DON'T JUST ASK QUESTIONS.
YOU'RE MOLDING AND MELDING THIS
PLAN.
DO IT.
I'M CONCERNED THAT YOU'RE JUST
GOING TO ASK YOUR QUESTIONS.
IT'S GOING TO GO BACK TO THE
PROJECT TEAM AND I'LL SAY WELL
I GUESS WE CAN KEEP ON THE SAME
DIRECTION.
>> I'M HOPING I'M GOING TO STAY
HERE.
I HOPE EVERYONE ELSE DOES FOR A
ROBUST DEBATE.
HEY, WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU'RE
DOING?
MAKE THAT CHANGE.
MAKE THE CHANGE.
HOW MANY PEOPLE HERE ARE
HOMEOWNERS?
DON'T ANSWER THAT QUESTION.
IT'S RHETORICAL HOW MANY PEOPLE
BOUGHT A HOME IN THE LAST THREE
YEARS?
THE REAL QUESTION IS HOW MANY
PEOPLE COULD AFFORD TO PURCHASE
THEIR HOME AT CURRENT PRICES?
THE MEDIAN PRICE BANANA FIBER
HOME LISTED IN THE SUMMER WAS
SIX HUNDRED THOUSAND ONE
HUNDRED AND TWENTY THOUSAND
DOLLAR DOWN PAYMENT 4500
DOLLARS A MONTH EIGHT PERCENT
INCREASE LAST YEAR BY TWENTY
TWENTY SEVEN IT'LL BE SEVENTY
SEVEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND BY 2030 IT'LL BE A
MILLION THE MEDIAN PRICE OF A
HOME IN ANN ARBOR IF YOU'RE
GOING TO RESTRICT HOUSING THE
FUTURE PAYOUTS I CAN SAY WHAT
REALITY ARE YOU LIVING IN?
I'M SORRY I'M JUST BEING A
LITTLE TENSE HERE BECAUSE I
WANT TO NUDGE YOU TO MAKE SOME
DECISIONS AND IN SOME CONCERTED
DIRECTION BACK TO THE PROJECT
TEAM THAT I DON'T THINK THEY'VE
GOTTEN YET BECAUSE A LOT
OF THESE COMMENTS CAME UP FROM
THE STEERING COMMITTEE, THE
SAME REVIEW AT THE STEERING
COMMITTEE.
THE SAME AUTHORS HERE WROTE
THEIR PAPERS, GOT THEM ATTACHED
TO THE DOCUMENT AND THE
STEERING COMMITTEE.
>> NOTHING CHANGED SO PUT A
SMILE ON MY FACE BY THE END
OF THE MEETING, GIVE SOME
DIRECT FEEDBACK, MELD THIS
PLAN.
IT'S YOURS.
THAT'S WHAT BRET SAID.
IT'S YOUR PLAN.
DON'T JUST SEND IT BACK PLEASE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
THERE ARE OTHER FOLKS PRESENT
THAT WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT
THIS TIME.
>> YES.
HELLO MY NAME IS KATE.
I LIVE ON NORTH ST. STREET AND
I'M A NURSE.
I WORK AT THE NURSING SCHOOL
NOW BUT SPENT THE LAST DECADE
WORKING AT MICHIGAN MEDICINE.
I WANT TO TALK AGAIN ABOUT THE
EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT AND
SPECIFICALLY THAT AREA IN S
INDUSTRIAL THAT KEEPS COMING UP
BECAUSE IT'S SUCH A GEM OF AN
AREA BUT YEAH
, I UNDERSTAND THE
INSTINCT TO WANT TO PRESERVE
PARTS OF THE CITY AS THEY ARE.
I FEEL THAT INSTINCT MYSELF
SOMETIMES BUT THAT INSTINCT IS
THE SAME THING THAT'S KEEPING
ANN ARBOR SO EXPENSIVE FOR SO
MANY PEOPLE AND AND WE NEED
MORE HOUSING SO MY COWORKERS AT
THE HOSPITAL WOULD LOVE US A
SURE TO COMMUTE BEFORE THEIR 12
HOUR SHIFTS BUT THEY CAN'T
AFFORD TO LIVE HERE.
IT'S NOT ALL THEM.
MY BROTHER IN LAW HE WORKS IN
HEATING AND COOLING HIS
SERVICES FURNACES ALL OVER THE
CITY.
HE CANNOT AFFORD TO LIVE IN THE
WE NEED MORE HOUSING AND YOU
CITY.
ALL HAVE SUCH A WONDERFUL
WE NEED MORE HOUSING AND YOU
OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE A
ALL HAVE SUCH A WONDERFUL
DIFFERENCE.
OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE A
>> YES, I.
DIFFERENCE.
I GUESS I ASK YOU TO SPEAK WITH
>> YES, I.
THE CONSULTANTS OR HOWEVER THAT
I GUESS I ASK YOU TO SPEAK WITH
EXACTLY WORKS TO TO SEE IF THEY
THE CONSULTANTS OR HOWEVER THAT
WILL ALLOW RESIDENTIAL IN THAT
EXACTLY WORKS TO TO SEE IF THEY
AREA SPECIFICALLY THE
WILL ALLOW RESIDENTIAL IN THAT
INDUSTRIAL AREA WHICH IS REALLY
AREA SPECIFICALLY THE
NEAR TO MY HEART.
INDUSTRIAL AREA WHICH IS REALLY
I'VE LOGGED A LOT HOURS ON
NEAR TO MY HEART.
INDUSTRIAL BETWEEN THE
I'VE LOGGED A LOT HOURS ON
LAUNDROMAT AND BENIS AND
INDUSTRIAL BETWEEN THE
DROSTE.
LAUNDROMAT AND BENIS AND
IT WOULD BE A REALLY LOVELY
DROSTE.
AREA TO HAVE MIXED USE I THINK
IT WOULD BE A REALLY LOVELY
SO YOU HAVE AND LET'S KEEP
AREA TO HAVE MIXED USE I THINK
DOING GOOD THINGS AND THANK
SO YOU HAVE AND LET'S KEEP
THANK YOU
.
HELLO WELCOME.
>> YEAH HI MY NAME IS KHELIL.
I ACTUALLY LIVE IPSI TOWNSHIP
NOW BUT I JUST MOVED THERE KIND
OF OVER THE LAST YEAR I WOULD
SAY U OF M FOR UNDERGRAD AND
I'M CURRENTLY A GRADUATE
STUDENT THERE AND I'VE LIVED IN
ARBOR FOR ALMOST A DECADE.
I WAS RENTING THE WHOLE TIME
AND AS DENHA SAID I HAD TO MOVE
EVERY TIME RIGHT AND I THINK
YEAH THE PRICES JUST KEPT GOING
UP EVERY TIME AND MY LOVELY
WIFE WORKS U OF M THANKFULLY
SHE WORKS REMOTE SO WE DON'T
HAVE TO HAVE A WELL SHE DOESN'T
HAVE TO HAVE A HUGE COMMUTE BUT
I WHEN I GO TO THE OFFICE ON
CAMPUS I TAKE YOU KNOW A COUPLE
OF BUSSES TO GET THERE.
IT TAKES ME LIKE AN HOUR TO GET
THERE.
I DON'T HAVE A PROBLEM WITH IT
YOU KNOW AS IT IS BUT I
UNDERSTAND THAT FOR OTHER
PEOPLE THIS IS WAY WORSE.
SO HAVING MORE HOUSING AND MORE
OPPORTUNITIES TO BUILD NEW
HOUSING I'M ALL FOR THAT IDEA.
AND SO RESTRICTING THOSE ZONES
I WOULD SAY I AM HEAVILY
AGAINST THAT BUT SO THAT'S I
THINK I COULD SAY BECAUSE I
DON'T KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT
PLANNING AND ALL THIS BUT YEAH
THAT'S MY TWO CENTS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU FOR DO WE HAVE ANYONE
ELSE PRESENT THAT WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK AT THIS TIME.
YEAH
.
>> HELLO MARK SKIBO I'M A
STEERING COMMITTEE MEMBER AND
I'VE ALREADY WRITTEN YOU A
THREE PAGE WALL OF TEXT.
FEEL FREE TO READ AT YOUR
LEISURE.
I GUESS I WANTED TO TAKE A
MOMENT AND TALK ABOUT SOME
OF THE CHALLENGES THAT I FELT
WHEN TRYING TO GIVE YOU THAT
FEEDBACK.
I LIVE IN A SINGLE FAMILY
NEIGHBORHOOD 70S AREA HOUSES
WITH BIG SETBACKS AND WHEN I
THINK ABOUT SOMEBODY BUILDING A
FOUR OR FIVE STORY APARTMENT
BUILDING IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE
IT SEEMS LIKE IT JUST WOULDN'T
FIT.
AND WHAT I'VE BEEN THINKING
ABOUT MORE RECENTLY IS AS I
THINK ABOUT TRIPS I'VE TAKEN TO
BOSTON, TO CHICAGO AND NOT TO
THE DOWNTOWN BUT TO THE
NEIGHBORHOODS AROUND THE
DOWNTOWN I THINK ABOUT THE
BROOKLYN BROWNSTONES OR THE
CHICAGO THREE UNITS, THREE
FLOORS.
THEY HAVE SOME NAME FOR THAT
KIND OF CLASSIC CHICAGO
BUILDING.
THESE ARE NEIGHBORHOODS WHERE
THESE KINDS OF MISSING MIDDLE
HOUSES WITH ZERO SET BACKS ARE
COMMON AND FIT INTO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD CHARACTER.
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE COULD
HAVE IN ANN ARBOR AND FRANKLY
THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WE NEED
TO HAVE IN ANN ARBOR IF WE WANT
TO BRING HOUSING AFFORDABILITY,
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY.
AND SO EVEN THOUGH IT MIGHT BE
CHALLENGING TO IMAGINE THAT
APARTMENT BUILDING IN A SINGLE
FAMILY NEIGHBORHOOD NOW WHEN
WRITING THIS COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
WE NEED TO THINK ABOUT NOT JUST
THE NEXT THREE YEARS AND THE
NEXT FIVE YEARS, THE NEXT 10
YEARS BUT REALLY THE NEXT 40
YEARS, 50 YEARS, 100 YEARS.
HOW CAN WE WRITE A PLAN THAT IS
FLEXIBLE AND THAT ALLOWS THE
CITY TO CHANGE ORGANICALLY TO
MEET THE NEEDS OF RESIDENTS,
COMMUTERS, NEW PEOPLE WHO MIGHT
MOVE HERE SO I ENCOURAGE YOU AS
YOU WRITE THIS TO THINK
AMBITIOUSLY, THINK BIG, THINK
FLEXIBLY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME
WITH
THAT?
>> DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE
CALLERS?
WE DO.
ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ, YOU CAN
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMITTEE
FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES.
>> HI.
THIS IS ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ
CALLING FROM FOURTEEN THIRTY
LAS VEGAS DRIVE IN THE FOURTH
WARD NOT THE OLD BUT THE NEW
FOURTH WARD OVERALL I LIKE MANY
THINGS ABOUT THIS PLAN.
THE SIMPLIFICATION OF DISTRICTS
IS GREAT.
I'M GLAD TO SEE SMALL SCALE
COMMERCIAL USES AND ADDITIONAL
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY.
I WRITE IN THE LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT THAT
REPLACED OUR CURRENT ONE IN OUR
TWO DISTRICTS.
I'M EXTREMELY COMFORTABLE WITH
MY OWN 1950'S TRACT HOME
NEIGHBORHOOD CHANGING AND
IDENTIFYING DUE TO THESE
CHANGES AND URGING THAT TO
WATER THIS DOWN.
I ABSOLUTELY WOULD CONSIDER
BUNGALOW KAUTZ TOWNHOUSES AND
THREE FLATS TO BE APPROPRIATE
AND LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL IN
FACT WOULD BE COMFORTABLE WITH
EVEN MORE DENSITY IN HEIGHT
HERE I DO SHARE SOME CONCERNS
RAISED BY SEVERAL PEOPLE WHO
HAVE WRITTEN TO YOU AND SPOKE
TO YOU TONIGHT ON THE SUBJECT.
FIRST I NOTE THE MIXED-USE
TRANSITION DISTRICT QUITE A BIT
MORE RESTRICTIVE IN TERMS
OF HEIGHT THAN OUR EXISTING DC
ONE DISTRICT AND IT'S TROUBLING
THAT WE'RE ANTICIPATING DOWN
ZONING PARTS OF THE CURRENT DC
ONE CORRIDORS TO THIS NEW
DISTRICT.
I DON'T SEE A NEED FOR THIS DC
ONE ALREADY ADJUSTS BASED ON
NEARNESS TO RESIDENTIAL ZONES
PERHAPS DC ONE AREA SHOULD ALL
BE HUBS OR PERHAPS WE SHOULD
BRING THE DC ONE NIGHT ROLLS
INTO THIS DISTRICT.
SECONDLY, I DO NOT SEE THE NEED
FOR THESE RETAIL INNOVATION OR
EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS.
WE HAVE A HOUSING CRISIS NOT A
JOBS CRISIS OR A RETAIL CRISIS
AND AS A CENTER FOR JOB
SHOPPING, ENTERTAINMENT AND
DINING FOR THE REGION AND I DO
NOT SEE THIS CHANGING BECAUSE
WE ALLOW MORE HOUSING TO BE
BUILT.
WHILE I UNDERSTAND THE INTENT
HERE, I DON'T AGREE.
I DON'T THINK WE SHOULD
SUBSIDIZE THESE USERS AT THE
EXPENSE OF HOUSING.
PERHAPS THERE'S ANOTHER WAY WE
CAN DO THIS WITHOUT LIMITING
LAND USE.
AND FINALLY I THINK WE REALLY
NEED TO FIGURE OUT A WAY TO
CALM TRAFFIC ON THESE
CORRIDORS.
I GET IT ISN'T REALLY PART
OF WHAT WE'RE DOING WITH THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN BUT MANY
OF THESE COULD BE TERMED SEWERS
THAT EXACTLY ATTRACTIVE PLACES
TO LIVE WHEN THERE'S FAST LOUD
TRAFFIC RIGHT OUTSIDE YOUR
DOOR.
WE NEED TO FIND A WAY TO FIX
THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
, MR. LEONARD.
ADAM GOODMAN, YOU CAN ON MUTE
AND YOU HAVE THREE MINUTES TO
ADDRESS THE COMMISSION.
THANKS.
ADAM GOODMAN 400 VIRGINIA
AVENUE.
SO MANY OTHERS FROM I'D SAY MY
BIGGEST CONCERN IS ABOUT
PROPOSING DISTRICTS THAT WOULD
RESTRICT HOUSING.
AND SO I THINK WE SHOULD BE
REALLY CLEAR HERE THAT WHAT
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT IS USING
THE LAND USE REGULATION TO
SUBSIDIZE LESS VALUABLE LAND
USES YOU KNOW, IN THE
EMPLOYMENT NONRESIDENTIAL
DISTRICT AND TALK ABOUT NOT
ALLOWING HOUSING TO OUTCOMPETE.
I MEAN THAT MEANS THAT WE ARE
ARTIFICIALLY SUPPRESSING
PROPERTY VALUES TO DO THAT AND
IN THE YOU KNOW, MIXED USE
RETAIL OR OR INNOVATION OFFICE,
WHATEVER YOUR SORT OF YOU'RE
DOING SOME COMBINATION OF THAT
AND THEN ALSO FORCING
DEVELOPERS INTERNALLY SUBSIDIZE
THOSE USES BY POTENTIALLY
MAKING THE HOUSING COMPONENT BE
HIGHER PRICED.
YOU EXTREMELY UNAFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
AND SO YOU KNOW, ALL OF THIS IS
SORT OF TO ME I THINK IT'S THE
DEAD OPPOSITE OF WHAT WE WANT
TO DO.
WE WANT TO MEET OUR GOALS
AROUND AFFORDABILITY EQUITY AND
YOU PROTECTING AND GROWING THE
TAX BASE FOR THAT MATTER.
AND SO I HEAR YOU ON ON
DIVERSIFICATION.
IF I WERE TRYING TO BUILD OUT
AN INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO FOR
MYSELF THEN YEAH,
DIVERSIFICATION IS A GOOD
THING.
RIGHT.
BUT WHAT I'M NOT GOING TO DO IS
I'M NOT GOING TO GO OUT FOR A
PARTICULAR TYPE OF ASSET.
I'M NOT GOING TO PAY YOU KNOW,
A HUGELY INFLATED PRICE TO GET
TO GET AN ASSET AND YOU KNOW,
LIGHTING MONEY ON FIRE IS NOT
SOUND INVESTMENT STRATEGY.
>> WE'RE ACTUALLY REALLY
FORTUNATE IN ANN ARBOR THAT WE
TYPICALLY DON'T HAVE TO
SUBSIDIZE NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
YOU KNOW, YOU LOOK AT DETROIT
FOR A VERY DIFFERENT SITUATION
AND YOU KNOW, I THINK THAT'S
GREAT AND WE SHOULDN'T DO IT
WHEN IT'S NOT NECESSARY.
>> YOU KNOW, THAT SAID, MR.
LEONHARDT SAID A VERY
INTERESTING SENTENCE THAT THAT
VERY END OF THE PRESENTATION
THAT WAS THIS DOESN'T HAVE TO
BE A REGULATORY FRAMEWORK WITH
A GREAT POINT IF WE'RE GOING TO
DO SUBSIDIES OR INCENTIVES,
IT'S PROBABLY BETTER TO JUST DO
THEM DIRECTLY BECAUSE DOING IT
THROUGH REGULATION IS REALLY
INELEGANT WAY TO DO THAT
BECAUSE IT CREATES A MANDATE
,
NOT JUST AN INCENTIVE.
>> THIRTY MORE SECONDS.
AS FOR YOU KNOW, THE RETAIL
DISTRICT ACTUALLY SEEMS TO HAVE
TO QUESTIONS WHAT IS ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, DEMAND REQUIRING RETAIL
AND RESTRICTING HOUSING.
BUT THE OTHER IS ABOUT KIND
OF ALLOWING MORE FLEXIBILITY
FOR INCREMENTAL CHANGES TO THE
EXISTING FORM RIGHT NOW THE
STARQUEST IS GOING TO GIVE ME A
LOOK FOR THIS BUT I THINK
THAT'S ACTUALLY A LEGITIMATE
QUESTION.
>> IT'S WORTH POINTING OUT THAT
BASICALLY EVERY SUPERMARKET IN
ANN ARBOR HAS BEEN MADE
NONCONFORMING BY ONE WITH A
COUPLE OF EXCEPTIONS THAT AT
LEAST ALL THE KROGER IS RIGHT.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, I DO THINK WE
NEED TO THINK ABOUT YOU.
DO WE NEED SOME RELIEF THERE TO
MAKE SURE THAT WE DON'T DRIVE
THOSE BUSINESSES CITY ENTIRELY
?
BUT THEN AGAIN, MAYBE THE ZIBA
JUST IS THAT IS THAT RELIEF
MAYBE THAT'S ENOUGH?
I DON'T KNOW.
I THINK IT'S JUST GUESSING THAT
THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, MR. GOODMAN.
THE CALLERS ON THE LINE NO
OTHER HANDS RAISED.
OK, GIVE IT TO OK.
FIRST OFF, THANK YOU FOR ALL
THE PUBLIC FEEDBACK SUPER
HELPFUL AND GIVES ME HOPE ON
THE CIVIC ENGAGEMENT SIDE
OF THINGS.
SO WITH THAT THERE'S NO
MOVEMENT HERE.
ALL WE'RE DOING IS A FEEDBACK
SESSION AND I THINK THE WAY TO
TALK THROUGH THIS IS ACTUALLY
THE FRAMING OF THE QUESTIONS
THAT WERE DONE.
BUT I WOULD ACTUALLY FIRST LIKE
TO START WITH THAT QUESTION
OF WHERE WOULD WE NOT LIKE
SEEING AND SO MANY
COMMISSIONERS WANT TO KICK US
OFF.
WE'RE JUST GOING RIGHT INTO
DISCUSSION.
COMMISSIONER WAITZ,
UNFORTUNATELY I'M NOT GOING TO
ANSWER YOUR QUESTION BUT I WANT
TO START WITH WHAT MR. CHAMBERS
SAID BECAUSE HE STATED WHAT I
PERCEIVED, WHICH IS WE HAVE A
HIDDEN STAKEHOLDER IN OUR
CONVERSATIONS AND I SAY THAT
BECAUSE I'VE BEEN PAYING
ATTENTION LIKE A LOT OF YOU
HAVE TO THIS CONVERSATION ABOUT
WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO ACHIEVE.
FOR INSTANCE, WE HAD A ROBUST
CONVERSATION ABOUT THE FORTY
EIGHT FOOT HEIGHT LIMIT AND IT
GOT REMOVED THAT GOT REMOVED
COMPLETELY FROM THE
CONSULTANT'S PRESENTATION.
IT GOT REMOVED FROM THE PUBLIC
PRESENTATION AT THE LIBRARY AND
IN YOUR COMMENTS TONIGHT IT'S
STILL REMOVED BECAUSE YOU
STARTED WITH A 30 FOOT A 30 30
30 FOOT FIVE FOOT HEIGHT LIMIT.
>> AND SO IT'S CONFUSING TO ME
BECAUSE IF WE'RE CONSISTENTLY
GIVING THE SAME FEEDBACK BUT
EVERY TIME THE FEEDBACK IS
AGGREGATED AND REPRESENT IT TO
US AND IT'S MISSING THE
FEEDBACK THAT TELLS ME SOMEBODY
SOMEWHERE IS GETTING RID OF IT.
SO THEY'RE THEY'RE HEARING IT.
THEY'RE PROCESSING IT AND THEN
THEY'RE ELIMINATING IT AND I'D
LIKE THAT PERSON TO BE KNOWN SO
THAT WE CAN UNDERSTAND BECAUSE
IF WE ARE IN FACT AS YOU
ARTICULATED THE COAUTHORS
OF THIS, THEN CAN WE CREATE A
FRAMEWORK WHERE WE'RE VOTING
THEN LIKE WHERE WE HAVE RECORDS
OF WHAT WE'RE SAYING AND THEY
ARE SORT OF TRACKED SO THAT WE
CAN SEE HERE WAS THE
DISCUSSION.
>> HERE'S WHERE WE AGREED.
NOW WHERE DOES IT SHOW UP?
I'LL GO BACK TO THE CHAIRS
QUESTION ABOUT WHERE DON'T I
WANT HOUSING?
I DON'T I DON'T KNOW THAT THERE
ARE ANY PLACES IN THE CITY THAT
I WOULD EXCLUDE HOUSING AND TO
MR. LEONARD QUESTION AROUND THE
MISSING MIDDLE, I DON'T I DON'T
AGREE WITH THAT LINE.
I DON'T THINK THERE SHOULD BE A
LINE ON THE MISSING MIDDLE IN
THE RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOODS
IN MY OWN NEIGHBORHOOD I
WELCOME TOWNHOUSES.
I WOULD WELCOME WHAT IS A
TWELVE FLATS, THREE FLATS I
GREW UP IN THE INNER CITY
OF WASHINGTON DC MY FAMILY
OWNED ROADHOUSES THEY WERE ALL
,YOU KNOW, ABUTTING AND
ADJACENT THREE TO FOUR STORIES
AND THAT'S HOW OUR FAMILY BUILT
WEALTH.
>> WE WERE IN DUPLEXES.
I MOVED EVERY YEAR SO I I
REALLY UNDERSTAND WHAT THE
AUDIENCE IS TALKING ABOUT.
WHEN I GREW UP IN DC WE MOVED
YEAR AFTER YEAR AFTER YEAR WHEN
I CAME TO ANN ARBOR I RENTED ON
THE NORTH SIDE I TRY TO RENT ON
CRUS BUT I HAD A ROOMMATE WHO
DIDN'T PAY AN ELECTRIC BILL AND
SO THE LANDLORD REJECTED US.
YOU KNOW IT WAS LIKE AN
ARCHITECT, A COMPUTER SCIENTIST
,A GRAPHIC DESIGNER LIKE WHAT
BETTER YOU KNOW, SORT
OF TENANTS THAT YOU GET AND
THEN I GOT INTO A COUNTY HOUSE
BEFORE I WAS ABLE TO BUY MY
HOUSE.
BUT AGAIN I THINK MR. CHAMBERS
POINT OF I'VE BEEN IN MY HOME
NOW FOR 18 YEARS AND YOU ARE
ABSOLUTELY CORRECT MY HOUSE HAS
APPRECIATED SO MY WEALTH HAS
GROWN UP.
MY KIDS KNOW THIS.
WE HAVE A TRUST.
THEY KNOW EXACTLY HOW MUCH
MONEY THEY'RE GOING TO GET
UNLESS THEY KILL US AND IT'S
GOING TO GO ALL TO CHARITY IF
THEY PLOT THAT WAY.
BUT WE ARE WE ARE ABSOLUTELY
WEALTHY BECAUSE OF THE
APPRECIATION OF OUR HOME VALUE
AND IT WOULD BE HARD FOR US TO
BUY OUR EXACT HOUSE TODAY AND I
DON'T WANT THAT FOR MY KIDS.
I DON'T WANT THAT FOR FUTURE
RESIDENTS OF THE CITY.
SO I WANT AN ABUNDANCE
OF HOUSING TO YOUR QUESTION,
OK, THANK YOU.
>> I WANT TO PROFFER JUST A
LITTLE BIT OF CLARIFICATION
BECAUSE WHERE THAT FORTY EIGHT
FEET CAME FROM I THINK WE HAD A
DISCUSSION ABOUT THIS THE
COMPLAN MEETING AND I'LL JUST
EXPLAIN MY TRAIN OF THOUGHT
WHEN I HAD BROUGHT THAT UP
WHICH WAS TO ME TO THE EXTENT
THAT'S FEASIBLE I WOULD LIKE TO
TRY TO ELIMINATE CONFLICTS WITH
THE MICHIGAN BUILDING
CODE RELATIVE TO ZONING CODE SO
THAT A DEVELOPER DOESN'T HAVE
TO NECESSARILY LOOK AT MULTIPLE
SOURCES TO SAY LIKE OH THIS IS
WHAT I CAN DO UNDER MICHIGAN
BUILDING CODE .
BUT FOR SOME REASON IT HAS
DIFFERENT DEFINITIONS THAN
ZONING AND SO I WAS LOOKING AT
TYPE THREE CONSTRUCTION WOOD
FRAME NON-STORE SPRINKLER
RESIDENTIAL YOU CAN DO UP TO
FIFTY FIVE FEET ABOVE THE
GRADE.
THE FORTY EIGHT FEET
SPECIFICALLY CAME FROM SOME
OF THE PROPOSALS THAT WE WERE
GETTING I THINK IT WAS LOCKWOOD
BUT I THINK THAT WAS ACTUALLY
FORD OR THREE WHAT I WAS TRYING
TO COMBINE THE PRACTICALITY
OF TRYING TO ELIMINATE CONFLICT
POINTS BETWEEN ZONING AND THE
MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE AND I
THINK WE ACTUALLY ALSO WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT THE RESIDENTIAL
CODE AT ONE POINT AS WELL BUT
IT HELPS TO REDUCE CONFLICTS
AND TO TRY TO CREATE SOME LEVEL
OF ELIGIBILITY AND STREAMLINE
THINGS SO THAT AGAIN A
DEVELOPER DOESN'T HAVE TO LOOK
AT MULTIPLE POINTS AND SAY THIS
IS WHAT IS ACTUALLY CREATING
THE LEAST AMOUNT OF BUILDABLE
HEIGHT FOR ME.
AND SO THAT'S WHERE THAT
COMMENT CAME FROM ALSO HAS TO
DO WITH GENERALLY A FLOOR IS
ABOUT TWELVE FEET AND SO ON
WOOD CONSTRUCTION ON SPRINKLER
YOU'D THINK GENERALLY YOU
SQUEEZE OUT FOUR FLOORS IF YOU
COULD NOW I THERE IS A QUESTION
TO BE HAD WHICH IS ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS THAT WE HAVE TO TALK
ABOUT WHICH IS YOU KNOW WHAT IS
AN APPROPRIATE YOU KNOW THE
LAST THING WE WANT ARE UGLY
OBTRUSIVE RIGHT LARGER
COMPLETELY OUT OF SCALE AND NON
LEGIBLE THINGS THAT IMPACT
BUILDING FORM.
RIGHT.
BECAUSE EVEN IF IT'S BECAUSE
ULTIMATELY THERE'S A CHARM TO
SPECIFIC NEIGHBORHOODS, ET
CETERA.
THAT BEING SAID, WE DO HAVE TO
ADD AN ADDITIONAL DENSER
HOUSING AND SO SO WHAT IS THE
CORRECT BALANCE?
I THINK THAT'S THE QUESTION
WE'RE HERE TO DELIBERATE.
I WANTED TO AT LEAST PROVIDE
THAT KIND OF CLARIFICATION AS
TO WHERE THAT NUMBER CAME FROM
AND IT HAS TO DO WITH THE THE
ELIMINATION TO THE EXTENT
POSSIBLE BETWEEN CONFLICTS
OF MULTIPLE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF CODE ZONING AND MICHIGAN
BUILDING CODE AND THEN ALSO
WHAT IS ECONOMICALLY FEASIBLE
FROM THINKING THROUGH IF THIS
DOESN'T WORK FOR TWO STORIES
BASED ON THE OVERALL COST BASIS
OF THE LAND, WHAT MAKES IT
FEASIBLE FOR A DEVELOPER TO SAY
OK, IF I CAN DO IT ADDITIONAL A
THIRD AND FOURTH FLOOR AND SO
GENERALLY THE TOPOLOGY THAT
WE'VE SEEN MOST AFFORDABLE
HOUSING PROPOSALS HAVE BEEN FOR
STORIES OUT OF PURE STACK BUILD
PROPOSAL.
>> SO I JUST WANTED TO PROVIDE
THAT CLARITY BUT I WILL FOLLOW
THAT UP WITH PROMPTING SOME
OF THE OTHER COMMISSIONERS TO
ASK WHAT DOES LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL MEAN TO YOU?
>> AND SO I INVITE ANOTHER
COMMISSIONER TO RESPOND THAT
COMMISSIONER ADAMS I'M GOING TO
ANSWER THAT AND THEN I'LL
ANSWER SOME OF THE THINGS.
SO I THINK I TEND TO THINK
ABOUT THE QUESTIONS THAT YOU'VE
ASKED LESS IN TERMS OF WHAT ARE
WE ALLOWING AND WHAT DO WE WANT
AND MORE ABOUT WHAT WE DON'T
WANT.
>> WHAT ARE WE BANNING?
WHAT ARE WE PROHIBITING THAT'S
A PROFESSIONAL HABIT THAT I
HAVE AND I THINK THIS IS USEFUL
FRAMING BECAUSE I THINK THE
ONLY THING WE CAN SAY ABOUT THE
PLAN THAT WE'RE WORKING ON HERE
IS THAT WHAT WE PROHIBIT AND
WHAT WE MAKE LESS LIKELY TO
OCCUR, THAT'S WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN IF WE BAN SOMETHING
WE'RE NOT GOING TO GET IT IF WE
MAKE IT LESS LIKELY TO OCCUR,
WE'RE GOING TO GET LESS OF IT.
>> I HAVE A HARDER TIME
ENGAGING WITH QUESTIONS ABOUT
WHAT WE WANT CERTAIN DISTRICTS
TO LOOK LIKE.
WHAT DO WE WANT LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL TO FEEL LIKE IT'S
EASIER FOR ME TO THINK ABOUT
WELL WHAT IS A 48 FOOT OR A
THREE FOOT HEIGHT RESTRICTION
BAN WITH RESPECT TO LOW RISE?
I THINK YOU KNOW, I WAS LOOKING
AT LINE AT A FORTY EIGHT FOOT
STACK TRIPLEX AND THAT SEEMED
LIKE AN EXAMPLE OF GENTLE
INFILL THAT LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL REALLY OUGHT TO BE
ABLE TO ACCOMMODATE AGAIN
THINKING ABOUT WHAT ARE WE
TRYING TO BAN.
IT ALSO FEELS LIKE WE CAN ALLOW
THAT BUT ALSO BAN THINGS LIKE
LOCKWOOD BEING
PLOPPED DOWN IN
THE MIDDLE OF A RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD.
IT FEELS LIKE WE OUGHT TO BE
ABLE TO WRITE A PLAN AND ZONING
THAT THAT CAN ACCOMPLISH THOSE
THINGS AND DO SO WITH CLARITY
SO THAT PEOPLE LIKE ME DON'T
KNOW WHAT A STICK.
I CAN'T REMEMBER WHAT YOU SAID
STICK BUILT.
I DON'T KNOW THE STICK BUILDERS
BY THE PEOPLE WHO ARE GOING TO
BE READING THIS AND DIGESTING
IT.
UNDERSTAND WHAT A HEIGHT LIMIT
IS.
UNDERSTAND WHAT A SET
DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS MAKE
SENSE FORM MASS.
I'VE READ THE DEFINITION RAFAAT
A MILLION TIMES AND I CAN'T
APPLY IT AND I BARELY
UNDERSTAND AND I THINK THAT'S
THAT'S A POLITICAL PROBLEM THAT
A CLEAR PLAN WILL SOLVE.
AND SO WHEN I'M THINKING ABOUT
WHAT IS LOW RISE MEAN I'M
THINKING ABOUT WHAT ARE YOU
TRYING TO PROHIBIT AND I WHAT
I'M LOOKING AT THE FINAL
VERSION OF THE PLAN I'M GOING
TO APPLY STRICT SCRUTINY ON
ANYTHING THAT WOULD OPERATE TO
BAN SOMETHING THAT WE OUGHT TO
ALLOW.
IT MAY SEEM SIMPLISTIC BUT
THAT'S KIND OF HOW I'M
PROCESSING THE QUESTION THAT
YOU'RE ASKING WITH RESPECT TO
THE OTHER QUESTION WHICH IS
RELATES TO THIS SECTIONS OF THE
CITY WHERE THE PLAN IS EITHER
TO MAKE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
SAY RESTRICTED.
I DON'T SUPPORT THAT.
I THINK THE THE PREMISE OF ANY
DISTRICT THAT RESTRICTS HOUSING
IS THAT WE NEED TO USE A LAW TO
RESTRICT PROPERTY OWNERS FROM
DEVELOPING REAL ESTATE IN
ACCORDANCE WITH WHAT THE MARKET
NEEDS TO BE THE HIGHEST AND
BEST USE OF THAT REAL ESTATE
RIGHT NOW WE HAVE OFFICE AND
RETAIL SPACE DOWNTOWN THAT'S
NOT BEING OCCUPIED GROUND OR
RETAIL.
IT'S NOT BEING OCCUPIED THE
MOST RECENT STATE OF THE
DOWNTOWN DOCUMENT INDICATED AN
OFFICE VACANCY RATE OF AROUND
15 WITH A FOOTNOTE THAT THAT
MIGHT BE CONSERVATIVE BECAUSE
LEASES HAVEN'T EXPIRED YET.
>> IF THAT'S RIGHT, I MEAN IT
CERTAINLY SEEMS INTUITIVE
INTUITIVELY CORRECT.
MEANWHILE, WE HAVE A RENTAL
VACANCY RATE THAT'S NEAR ZERO
FUNCTIONALLY ZERO.
WE MIGHT LIKE THE IDEA OF MORE
OFFICE SPACE, MORE RETAIL.
WE LIKE THE IDEA OF A MORE
DIVERSE LOCAL ECONOMY BUT WE
CURRENTLY HAVE HOUSING CRISIS.
WE CAN SAY THAT BUT THE CRISIS
MEANS CRISIS AND EVERY
REASONABLE PROJECTION THAT I'VE
SEEN SAYS WE'RE NOT CLIMBING
OUT OF THAT FOR THE FORESEEABLE
FUTURE SO WE CAN'T PLAN AROUND
IT NOT BEING A CRISIS.
>> WE'RE GOING TO BE LIVING IN
IT FOR A WHILE.
SO I DON'T THINK WE CAN
PRIORITIZE HYPOTHETICAL
NON-EXISTENT OFFICE OR RETAIL
USES IN ANY ZONE IN ANY
QUANTITY OVER ACTUAL EXISTENT
RESIDENTIAL DEMANDS AND NEEDS
THAT THE COMMUNITY HAS.
THERE ARE A COUPLE OF OTHER
REASONS.
I THINK THIS FIRST IS I THINK
THE NOTION THAT WE NEED TO
MAXIMIZE BUSINESS OR
ENTREPRENEURIAL DEVELOPMENT OR
RESERVE CERTAIN AREAS OF THE
CITY FOR USES OTHER THAN
RESIDENTIAL IS INCOMPATIBLE IN
MY OPINION WITH THE COMMAND
OF THE APRIL TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
RESOLUTIONS WHICH DIRECTED US
TO PRIORITIZE HOUSING
CONSTRUCTION AT ALL INCOME
LEVELS PERMISSIVELY THROUGHOUT
THE CITY.
I THINK THE ESSENTIAL PREMISE
OF THESE DISTRICTS IS THAT THAT
THAT ANY ANY DISTRICT THAT
RESTRICTS HOUSING AND MAKES IT
HARDER TO BUILD IS THE OPPOSITE
OF MY OPINION FROM PERMISSIVE
IT'S RESTRICTIVE.
SO I THINK LEGISLATIVE WE HAVE
A DIRECTION TO GO IN THE
OPPOSITE DIRECTION THAT THAT
THESE MIXED USE HUBS AND
DISTRICTS WOULD HAVE US GO.
AS MULTIPLE COMMENTERS POINTED
OUT, THESE RESTRICTIONS THAT
ARE AIMED AT HOLDING OR
RESTRICTING LAND FROM BEING
DEVELOPED TO WHAT WE NEED IN
FAVOR OF WHAT WE MIGHT NEED
TOMORROW ARE IN FACT A LEGAL
SUBSIDY.
WE'RE TRANSFERRING WEALTH FROM
ONE SET OF PEOPLE WHEN OTHER
WE'RE TRANSFERRING WELL FROM
THE PEOPLE WHO OWN THE PROPERTY
WHO MIGHT WANT TO SELL IT FOR A
HIGHER USE.
WE'RE INHIBITING THE USEFUL THE
REDEVELOPMENT OF THE ZONES OR
SHRINKING THE TAX BASE.
WE'RE ACQUIRING NEW RESIDENTS
TO SUBSIDIZE ANYTHING THAT GOES
INTO THAT BUILDING.
IT WILL REQUIRE THEM IT DOESN'T
GET OCCUPIED TO UP TO BASICALLY
SUBSIDIZE THAT WITH THEIR RENTS
OR THEIR MORTGAGE.
NONE OF THOSE DYNAMICS I THINK
ARE DESIRABLE FROM A POLICY
PERSPECTIVE.
>> BUT THERE'S ONE MORE DYNAMIC
THAT WE'RE ALSO SUBSIDIZING IF
WE RESTRICT HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
IN A ZONE AND THAT'S WE
SUBSIDIZE THE UNIVERSITY AS IT
CONTINUES TO GOBBLE UP
CANNIBALIZE OUR TAX BASE, WE
OUGHT TO BE UP ZONING TO HIRE
SOMEBODY AND THAT IS ONE OF THE
TOOLS IN OUR TOOLBOX THAT
OPERATES AS A BULWARK AGAINST
THIS KIND OF LAND EXPANSION
THAT IS HURTING TAXPAYERS AND
HURTING THE CITY.
SO ANYTHING THAT AGAIN THAT
DEPRESSES THE VALUE OF A
PROPERTY IS MAKING IT EASIER
FOR A UNIVERSITY TO BUY IT AND
TAKE IT OFF THE TAX ROLLS.
>> WE DON'T NEED TO I THINK THE
PREMISE OF HOLDING THIS LAND OR
RESTRICTING IT FROM RESIDENTIAL
USES THAT WE NEED TO FIGHT
DISPLACEMENT BUT WE KNOW FROM
SLIDE TWENTY SIX IN THE DARK
THAT THAT EFFECT IS ALREADY
BEING ARRESTED BY EXISTING
LEASEHOLD INTEREST IN PROPERTY
BY THE FACT THAT IT'S HARD TO
REDEVELOP SOMETHING, IT'S HARD
TO ACQUIRE IT.
WE KNOW THAT WE'RE NOT SEEING A
LOT OF HOUSING REDEVELOPMENT IN
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
WE'RE NOT SEEING IN ONE
DISTRICTS.
THAT'S BECAUSE PLACES LIKE
BRICKS MORE HAVE AN EXISTING
COMMERCIAL INTEREST.
THEY HAVE EXISTING LEASES.
IT'S VERY STICKY TO OVERCOME
THAT DYNAMIC.
I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO ADD
NEW LAYERS OF LAW ON TOP
OF THOSE EXISTING CONTRACTS AND
OTHER DEVICES THAT ARE ARE
FUNCTIONALLY DOING THAT WORK
FOR US.
IF ARRESTING HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT IS SOMETHING WE
WANT TO PURSUE, I'M GOING TO
STOP TALKING NOW THANKS TO ADAM
.
DO WE HAVE OTHER COMMISSIONERS
WANT TO ADD COMMISSIONER
WEATHERBEE SO THIS IS PROBABLY
GOING TO BE A LITTLE RAMBLING.
I'M JUST MAKING SOME NOTES HERE
ABOUT SOME VARIOUS QUESTIONS
THAT WERE ASKED AND SO WHERE
DON'T I WANT HOUSING?
>> AND I HAVE A PRETTY STRONG
FEELING THAT I DON'T WANT
HOUSING AND FLOODWAYS AND I
THINK THAT THAT'S A REASONABLE
PLACE TO NOT PUT HOUSING AND I
THINK WE HAVE NOT ALWAYS DONE
THAT IN THE PAST AND I THINK
THAT I'M PRETTY CONFIDENT THAT
I'M THAT FLOODWAYS ARE NOT A
PLACE TO PUT HOUSING OTHER THAN
THAT I'M PRETTY AMBIVALENT AS
TO NOT PUTTING HOUSING IN SOME
PLACE BAUSE I THINK I'VE
LIVED IN THE CITY FOR A REALLY
LONG TIME AND THINGS CHANGE AND
WHAT I GREW UP ON THE NORTH
SIDE EVERYBODY THOUGHT AT THAT
POINT THAT THERE WAS GOING TO
BE SO MUCH DEVELOPMENT AND THEN
DEVELOPMENT WENT SOUTH AND
THINGS WERE DEVELOPED IN
ANOTHER PART OF THE CITY,
BRIARWOOD CAME IN.
I'M OLD AND YOU KNOW EVERYTHING
THINGS DIDN'T GET DEVELOPED IN
THE NORTH SIDE SO AND THEN
FIZER WENT AWAY AND YOU KNOW,
IT WAS A HUGE THING THIS WAS
GOING TO BE THE DEATH KNELL
OF THE CITY AND IT WAS NOT
GREAT.
AND THEN THE UNIVERSITY TOOK UP
ALL THAT LAND WHICH WAS SEMI
TERRIBLE BUT ALSO AN
OPPORTUNITY AND I THINK FOR
EVERY ZONE THERE ARE
OPPORTUNITIES.
THERE ARE THINGS THAT HAPPEN.
THERE ARE GOOD THINGS AND BAD
THINGS RESTRICTING HOUSING IN
ANY PLACE JUST SEEMS LIKE WE
DON'T KNOW WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN BUT WE KNOW PEOPLE NEED
PLACES TO LIVE AND SORT
OF DOVETAILING ON THE FLOODWAY
WE ARE SEEING A LOT OF CLIMATE
CHANGE AND THIS PART OF THE
COUNTRY IS PROBABLY GOING TO
SEE CLIMATE REFUGEES, PEOPLE IN
NEW ORLEANS KNOW WHAT SNOW IS
LIKE NOW.
SO YOU KNOW, ARE THE THINGS
THAT THAT WE HAVE THAT PEOPLE
HAVE TENDED TO STAY AWAY FROM
IN THE FUTURE WE MAY WANT MORE.
AND SO I JUST THINK RESTRICTING
HOUSING IS A IS A BAD IDEA.
I WOULD LIKE TO JUST NOTE TO
THE PEOPLE IN THE OLD FOURTH
WARD HISTORIC DISTRICTS ARE
REALLY HARD TO TOUCH WHAT WE
CAN DO WITH HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
I LIVE IN ALL THE HOUSE LEVELED
HOUSES THEY DON'T HAVE TO BE.
THEY OFTEN ARE BECAUSE OF THE
PEOPLE WHO OWN HOUSES, NOT
BECAUSE OF THE HOUSES
THEMSELVES.
WHAT WE CAN DO AND WE'RE
ALREADY SEEING THIS I SIT ON
THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
WE ARE NOW SEEING PEOPLE
UPGRADING OLD HOUSES BECAUSE
THERE IS NEW BUILDING AND
PEOPLE HAVE SAID HEY, NEW
BUILDING WILL MAKE PEOPLE
UPGRADE OLD HOUSING.
>> IT'S VERY SLOW BUT IT DOES
START TO HAPPEN AND WE ARE
SEEING THAT NOW THAT SOME
OF THESE OLDER BUILDINGS ARE
GETTING RENOVATED, THEY'RE
GOING TO HAVE LAUNDRY, THEY'RE
GOING TO HAVE MORE BATHROOMS.
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE FIRE
PROTECTION THAT IS ACTUALLY
LEGIT AND GOOD AND WINDOWS OPEN
AND DOORS THAT ARE NOT SCREENS
AND THINGS THAT ACTUALLY MAKE
FOR GOOD LIVING.
SO BUT UNFORTUNATELY I THINK
THERE'S A LOT MORE WE CAN DO A
LOT MORE NOT PUSHING AGAINST
THE HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND
OTHER PEOPLE MAY DISAGREE WITH
THAT BUT JUST HISTORIC
DISTRICTS ARE STATE
DESIGNATIONS AND SOMETIMES
FEDERAL DESIGNATION AND IT'S
REALLY DIFFICULT FOR THE CITY
TO DO MUCH WITH THAT AND THEN
MISSING MIDDLE.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I'VE
NOTICED SO WE'VE GIVEN THE
EXAMPLE OF DAVIS ROE SO DAVIS
ROE IS ACROSS THE STREET FROM
ME AND THERE ARE ACTUALLY TWO
SETS OF THERE'S DAVIS ROE AND
THEN THERE'S ANOTHER SET
OF CONDOS FROM DOWN THE STREET
.
THESE BOTH TOOK A SINGLE I
THINK IT WAS A TOTAL OF THREE
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSES AND THE
INTERESTING THING ABOUT DAVIS
ROE WE TALK ABOUT IS IN MIDDLE
BUT THEY ARE EXPENSIVE CONDOS
AND THE HOUSES DOWN FROM THEM
ARE EVEN MORE EXPENSIVE CONDOS
AND PEOPLE WERE REALLY UPSET
ABOUT TAKING ON THESE SINGLE
FAMILY HOMES AND BUILDING
CONDOS UNTIL THEY FOUND OUT
THEY EXPENSIVE CONDOS BECAUSE
IT TURNS UP MISSING MIDDLE HAS
A LOT OF CONNOTATIONS AND SOME
OF IT IS TYPE OF HOUSING AND
SOME OF IT IS WHO'S GOING TO
LIVE IN THE HOUSING AND WE GET
A LOT PEOPLE WHO SAY I DON'T
WANT THAT TYPE OF HOUSING UNTIL
THEY KNOW WHO'S GOING TO LIVE
IN THE HOUSING AND THEY CHANGE
THEIR MINDS DEPENDING ON IF
THERE ARE GOING
TO BE RICH
PEOPLE LIVING IN THAT HOUSING
OR NOT RICH PEOPLE LIVING IN
THE HOUSING.
AND I SAT IN ON SOME REALLY
INTERESTING MEETINGS WHERE
PEOPLE'S OPPOSITION TO NEW
BUILDING CHANGED DRAMATICALLY
WHEN THEY FOUND OUT THEY WERE
GOING TO BE A MILLION DOLLAR
CONDOS BECAUSE THAT MEANT THEIR
HOUSING WOULD GO UP THEIR
SINGLE FAMILY HOME WAS NOT
GOING TO BE WORTH LESS.
IT WAS GOING TO BE WORTH MORE.
AND SO I THINK ONE OF THE
THINGS WHEN WE TALK ABOUT
MISSING MIDDLE IS IT'S NOT JUST
A HOUSING TYPE BECAUSE HOUSING
TYPES DEPENDING ON HOW THEY'RE
MARKETED AND FINISHED CAN
ACTUALLY BE MORE EXPENSIVE THAN
THE SINGLE FAMILY HOMES THAT
WERE THERE.
SO I THINK THAT'S WHY I DON'T
SEE A LINE ON THE MISSING
MIDDLE BECAUSE I THINK IT'S SO
VARIED AND AND I THINK MORE
UNITS IS GOOD.
BUT BUT SOME OF THOSE UNITS ARE
GOING TO BE REALLY EXPENSIVE
AND THAT'S JUST THE WAY IT IS.
COUNCILMAN REDISH, I WANT TO I
WANT TO GET INTO SOME OF THE I
WANT TO GET INTO THINGS THAT
I'M NOT FULLY QUALIFIED TO TALK
ABOUT BUT I DO WANT TO GET INTO
THE DETAILS AND SO I'LL SAY
SOME THINGS AND THEN IF I MAKE
MISTAKES PEOPLE CAN JUMP IN AND
HELP US THINK THEM THROUGH.
>> BUT SO ONE THING I DID WANT
TO SAY IS THAT I DO THINK THAT
IT IS IMPORTANT TO REMEMBER
THAT IF WE'RE GOING TO ALLOW
GREATER DENSITY IN IN WHAT'S
NOW ARE ONE AND TWO THAT THAT
DOES NOT NECESSARILY MEAN
PRICES ARE GOING TO COME DOWN
BECAUSE WHERE WE ARE SEEING
THAT HAPPEN FOR EXAMPLE ALONG
ASHLEIGH, THERE'S A LOT
OF GREATER DENSITY DENSITY
THERE AND IT IS REALLY
EXPENSIVE HOUSING NOW I'M NOT
SAYING THAT THAT'S NECESSARILY
BAD BECAUSE WE GET GOOD TAX
BASE, WHATEVER, WHATEVER BUT
WHERE WE'RE GOING TO MAKE A
DENT IN OUR AFFORDABILITY
CRISIS IS BY GETTING HOUSING
ALONG OUR CORRIDORS AND THERE
ARE THERE ARE TWO KINDS
OF CORRIDORS I FEEL AS THOUGH
THIS PLAN CALLS OUT WHICH IS
DIFFERENT THAN THE WAY WE'VE
BEEN THINKING ABOUT CORRIDORS
BEFORE WE WERE THINKING ABOUT
CORRIDORS IN TERMS OF OUR T7
CORRIDORS SO PLIMOTH I DON'T
NEED TO DO THE LIST.
>> WE KNOW THE LIST THIS PLAN
CALLS OUT STREETS THAT ARE
MAJOR ARTERIES IN TOWN BUT I
DON'T THINK WE WOULD HAVE
CALLED THEM CORRIDORS BEFORE
AND THAT'S PART OF WHAT'S
RECOMMENDED AS MIXED-USE
TRANSITION.
>> I LIKE THAT PART OF THIS
PLAN.
I LIKE THEM.
I LIKE THE NEW CORRIDORS AS
MIXED-USE TRANSITION.
I DON'T KNOW IF THEY WILL WORK
BECAUSE OF WHAT'S ON THERE NOW
SO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU WOULD
HAVE TO ASSEMBLE SO MANY
PARCELS TO GET GREATER DENSITY
ALONG THOSE THAT IT'S GOING TO
MATTER WHAT WE ZONE THEM BUT I
STILL THINK IT'S WORTH ZONING
THEM AND I THINK IT IS WORTH
MAKING A DISTINCTION BETWEEN
AND AGAIN I I COULD I AM NOT A
TRAINED PLANNER ALTHOUGH IF I
COULD GO BACK I WOULD BE BUT
BUT I I WHAT I SEE AS THE
ADVANTAGE ALONG THE CORRIDORS
OF THE MIXED USE TRANSITION
ZONING IS THAT IT'S A LITTLE
LESS TALL WHEN IT BUTTS UP
AGAINST LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL SO
IT'S 55 WITHIN 50 FEET.
T7 IS 55 WITHIN 80 FEET.
>> I MEAN ACTUALLY THAT IS MORE
PERMISSIVE AND THEN IT'S TCW TO
SEVENTY FIVE WITHIN 80 TO 300
FEET.
SO I MEAN ACTUALLY THE TRANSIT
ACTUALLY NOW NOW I'VE CONFUSED
MYSELF AS I'M LOOKING AT IT
AGAIN.
OK SO ACTUALLY LET ME ASK WHAT
ARE WE GAINING NOW?
>> I'M WONDERING WHAT WE ARE
GAINING BY HAVING A SEPARATE
DISTRICT FOR THOSE CORRIDORS
WHICH ARE MORE LIKE ARDEN'S
THAN THEY ARE FOR US.
>> WHY DON'T WE JUST RUN THEM
TO ONE BECAUSE THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO GET 300 FEET.
SO I THINK THAT MAKES SENSE.
BUT I'M OK AND I'M HAPPY FOR IF
SOMEONE WAS GOING JUMP IN AND
TELL ME WHAT I'M NOT SEEING
ABOUT THE DISTINCTION THAT'S
BEING ADDED.
I DO WANT TO WONDER WHY WE WERE
DOWN ZONE PARTS OF DC ONE TO
THIS THIS NEW CATEGORY THAT
THAT DOESN'T MAKE SENSE TO ME
AND THOUGH I'M OPEN TO THE NEW
CATEGORY FOR THE ARTERIES RIGHT
NOW, I'VE COMPLETELY TURNED
MYSELF SORT OF INSIDE OUT ABOUT
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THE VALUE
ADDED IS OF ADDING THIS RATHER
THAN JUST EXTENDING TO ONE.
>> SO THAT'S THAT IS ONE THING
PERHAPS I SHOULD LEAVE IT THERE
AND JUST COME BACK LATER.
BUT THE OTHER THINGS I WANTED
TO ASK ABOUT WERE SOME OF THE
PREMISES AROUND THE IDEA OF THE
EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT AND I
WANTED TO REALLY CONFRONT THE
QUESTION OF SELF INDUSTRIAL SO
IT FEELS LIKE THERE'S TWO AREAS
OF SOUTH INDUSTRIAL HERE.
THERE'S AN AREA THAT'S NORTH
OF 94 AND THERE'S AN AREA
THAT'S SOUTH OF 94 AND WE HAVE
HAD DISCUSSIONS AND CALLS SINCE
WE STARTED ZONING TO SEE ONE
WHICH IS QUITE A WHILE AGO NOW
THAT SOUTH INDUSTRIAL BE
INCLUDED IN THAT AND THAT'S
WHAT I'M HEARING AGAIN IS A
DESIRE THAT AT LEAST THE PART
OF SOUTH INDUSTRIAL THAT'S
NORTH OF 94 BE ZONED ONE AND I
JUST THINK IT'S TIME WE NEED TO
PUT THAT QUESTION ON THE TABLE
.
>> BUT I ALSO THINK THAT WE
NEED TO TAKE SERIOUSLY SOME
QUESTIONS OF LAND USES THAT WE
WOULD DESIRE THAT THAT THERE
WILL BE OPPORTUNITY COSTS IF
EVERYTHING IS IS IF RESIDENTIAL
FLOODS INTO PARTS AND I'M NOT
SURE THAT WE NEED TO WORRY
ABOUT FLOOD BUT OK, YOU SEE
WHERE I'M OK.
>> SO THE WHEN YOU MENTION
ENJOY GOING TO THRIFT STORES
AND THE PRODUCE STATION THOSE
TAKE A LOT OF LAND AND SO
WHAT'S BEING ASKED FOR HERE IS
FOR US TO BE MINDFUL THAT THERE
ARE USES THAT WE MIGHT WANT IN
THE CITY THAT MIGHT NOT BE TAX
BASE INTENSIVE BUT THEY MIGHT
CONTRIBUTE TO OUR
SUSTAINABILITY GOALS.
ONE THING THAT THE FOLKS WHO DO
THRIFT STORES ARE TELLING US IS
THAT THEY NEED PLACES TO STORE
THEM AND THEY DON'T WANT TO GO
WAY OUT OF THE TOWNSHIP BECAUSE
THAT STARTS TO BE RIDICULOUS
AND I DON'T HONESTLY I DON'T
HAVE A CRYSTAL BALL AND I DON'T
HAVE EXPERIENCE OF ANY OTHER
CITIES SO I DON'T KNOW IF WE
ALLOW RESIDENTIAL EVERYWHERE IF
WE WILL HAVE ANY LAND THAT'S
CHEAP ENOUGH FOR SOMEONE TO
MAKE ANOTHER THRIFT STORE OR
MAKE A STORAGE SPACE TO PUT THE
FURNITURE THAT PEOPLE REALLY
WANT.
BUT THERE'S NO THESE STORES
CAN'T THEY CAN'T STOP IT
BECAUSE THEY HAVE NO PLACE I AM
NOT DISMISSIVE OF THE CONCERN
THAT THERE ARE SOME LAND USERS
THAT WE MIGHT WANT TO HOLD
SPACE FOR.
I'M NOT DISMISSIVE OF THAT
CONCERN BUT I BUT I AM HEARING
THE TESTIMONY TO THE TO THE
WAYS THAT PARTS OF SOUTH
INDUSTRIAL ARE EXACTLY WHAT WE
SEEK TO PROMOTE WALKABILITY IN
A RANGE OF SERVICES WHICH
DOESN'T HAVE AS MUCH HOUSING ON
IT AS IT COULD.
SO I'M JUST TRYING TO BE HONEST
ABOUT THE CONFLICTS THAT I'M
HEARING AND FEELING AND THEN
I'M CONFUSED.
>> LOOK AT SOME OF THE I GOTCHA
.
SO I THINK THE QUESTION WAS WHY
THE MIXED USE TRANSITION AND
NOT JUST ONE SO MAYBE WE COULD
PASS THAT ONE OUT AND I SEE
THAT WE HAVE MR. HAN WITH US.
>> YEAH, LET ME START AND THEN
STACY, YOU ON TO ADD ANYTHING
JUST JUMP IN.
BUT FIRST OF ALL I WANT TO GO
BACK TO WHERE I STARTED.
LET'S TALK ABOUT ZONING.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT VISION.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT YOUR VISION
IS FOR ONE BUT YOU HAVE NOT YET
SEEN ANYTHING BUILT IN ONE.
SO WHEN YOU WERE HOLDING THAT
UP AS AS AN EXAMPLE OF WHAT YOU
ASPIRE TO, I JUST ASK THAT YOU
DO THAT WITH A LITTLE BIT
OF GRACE BECAUSE WE HAVE YET IN
THREE YEARS AND A SQUARE MILE
TO SEE A DEVELOPMENT BUILT
UNDER THAT REGULATORY
FRAMEWORK.
SO WHEN YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT
WHY NOT ZONE SOMETHING TO WHY
NOT JUST CALL RELATING TO ONE,
I JUST ASK YOU TO KEEP THAT IN
MIND ONE WAY THAT I THINK ABOUT
THE MIXED USE TRANSITION
DISTRICT IS THAT IT MIGHT VERY
WELL HAVE A RESPONSIVE HEIGHT
LIMITATION BUT IT MIGHT NOT BE
THE SAME AS WHAT OUR CURRENT
D.C. ONE DISTRICT IS IT BECAUSE
PERHAPS IT HAS MORE LIKELIHOOD
OR MORE OF AN EMPHASIS ON
RESIDENTIAL IN RESIDENTIAL
AREAS IT MIGHT NOT DEMAND THE
SAME STEP BACK AND HIGHER
FRAMEWORK THAT A DISTRICT OF UP
TO 300 BUILDINGS.
LET'S KEEP THAT IN PERSPECTIVE.
VERY FEW CIRCUMSTANCES MIGHT
MIGHT BE DESIRED BY OUR
REGULATORY AUTHORITY.
SO ONE WAY ONE REASON TO DO
THIS IS THAT IT MIGHT NOT
FOLLOW THE SAME ADJACENT
DISTRICT REFERENCE IMPACT THAT
LARGER HUBS DO OR THAT WHAT ONE
DOES TODAY.
SO THAT MIGHT BE A REASON THAT
YOU DON'T WANT TO JUST THINK
OF THESE UNILATERALLY.
YOU MIGHT DECIDE THAT AT WOMEN
AT THE RETAIL OR YOU ENVISION
THAT THOSE MIGHT
BE APPROPRIATE
FOR A DIFFERENT RESPONSIVENESS
TO THE SURROUNDING LAND USE
THAN MILLER OR PACKARD OR
WASHTENAW.
THANK YOU MICHELLE.
DO YOU WANT TO ADD TO THAT?
YES, I THINK THAT ONE THING
THAT MIGHT HELP WITH
COMMISSIONER ADDITIONS QUESTION
REGARDING ONE IN THE CORRIDORS
AND ALSO WITH WHAT WE'VE BEEN
HEARING IN THE PUBLIC COMMENT
IS THE LAND USE THAT WE ARE
SHOWING ON THE MAP IS NOT THE
EXACT SAME AS A ZONING DISTRICT
AND THAT THE COMPLAINT IS
REALLY FOCUSED ON THE LAND HIS
VISION AND IT CERTAINLY WILL
GUIDE THE ZONING WHICH WILL
HAPPEN LATER.
BUT THE ZONING IS THE LEGAL
FRAMEWORK.
IT IS THE ACTUAL ORDINANCES
THAT REGULATE THE HEIGHT THE
AREA THE BULK, THE USES THAT IS
ALL SOMETHING THAT ACTUALLY
COMES LATER.
AND I THINK PART OF MAYBE WHAT
HAS BEEN CONFUSED IS BECAUSE WE
DID WANT TO LEND SOME OF THESE
LAND USE IDEAS AND
CONCRETENESS.
WE BROUGHT IN SOME OF THE
ZONING ELEMENTS LIKE HEIGHT TO
HELP US PAINT THAT PICTURE.
BUT AT THIS FOR THE CURRENT
PLAN WE ARE VERY MUCH FOCUSED
ON LAND USE WHICH IS THE VISION
SO IT MAY NOT GET AS DETAILED
AS THE 35 FEET OR FORTY EIGHT
FEET SEVENTY FIVE FEET OR
HUNDRED FEET BUT THOSE WERE
BROUGHT INTO THE CONVERSATION
TO HELP PAINT A PICTURE THAT
WILL EVENTUALLY OF COURSE BE
CATALOGED AND BE BROUGHT BACK
WHEN THE CITY IS READY TO
ACTUALLY WRITE THE LEGAL ZONING
CODE WHICH WILL GET TO THAT
LEVEL OF DETAIL.
SO TO COMMISSIONER GISH'S
QUESTION ABOUT THE CORRIDORS,
IT IS AND I THINK TO WHAT SOME
OF THE PUBLIC HAD MENTIONED
LIKE WHY ARE WE DOWN ZONING THE
ONE DISTRICTS WE ARE NOT WE
HAVE NOT DONE ZONED ANYTHING
BECAUSE WE'RE NOT ZONING
ANYTHING RIGHT NOW BECAUSE
OF THE WAY DC ONE WORKS EVEN IF
YOU DID ZONE THE CORRIDOR
DAQUAN AS COMMISSIONERS MENTION
THE DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
AND THEIR ADJACENCY TO
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS WOULD
MEAN THAT YOU COULDN'T ACTUALLY
BUILD THE 300 FOOT BUILDING
RIGHT.
SO ON THE LAND USE MAP IT WILL
APPEAR AS A TRANSITION BECAUSE
THAT WHAT THAT IS WHAT IS
HAPPENING IN THE LAND USE
EFFECT.
SO THERE IS THAT DISTINCTION.
IT IS DEFINITELY VERY WONKY BUT
I THINK AND I HOPE THAT HELPS A
LITTLE BIT THAT IT IS THERE IS
A DISTINCTION SO WE ARE SHOWING
SOME LAND USES THAT LOOK MAYBE
DIFFERENT FROM CHIESI ONE BUT
IT'S NOT BECAUSE WE'RE DOWN
ZONING PLACES.
>> I HOPE THAT HELPS.
I THINK IT DOES.
AND TO CLARIFY THIS, MY
UNDERSTANDING IS THAT THE
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE WHICH
IS THE CURRENT ZONING DOCUMENT
BY WHICH STIPULATES THOSE
DETAILS IS NOT EXACTLY THAT'S
GOING TO FOLLOW THE QUASI
BINDING COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT
WE SET FORTH.
SO WE'RE WE'RE STILL THE LAND
USE PERMITTED SIDE WHICH WE
SHOULD TALK ABOUT NON VERSUS
YOU KNOW, PERMISSION PERMITTED
USES WITHIN THOSE ZONES.
>> BUT I THINK THAT
CLARIFICATION DEFINITELY HELPS
AND I SEE THAT COMMISSIONER
AUTON WANTED TO CHIME IN.
I HAVE SOME THOUGHTS I'M STILL
PROCESSING ARE NOT ON THE
COMPANIES OF PLANNING
SUBCOMMITTEE AND I WASN'T JUST
JOINING THE PLANNING COMMISSION
NOT THAT LONG AGO SO I'M STILL
TRYING TO COME UP TO SPEED I
JUST TO FOLLOW QUICKLY ON THE
COMMENT THAT WAS JUST MADE IT'S
DEFINITELY TRUE.
THE PLAN IS A POLICY DOCUMENT.
IT'S NOT THE LAW BUT IF YOU
HAVE A PLAN THAT SAYS YOU CAN'T
DO THAT, YOU SHOULDN'T DO THIS
HERE YOU REALLY MADE IT HARD TO
MAKE THE LAW ALLOW SOMETHING TO
HAPPEN THERE.
SO I I GET WITH THE TRANSITION
QUARTERS WHAT I'M SEEING IS
WHAT I'M ENVISIONING IS A
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD WITH
LINED ALONG THESE BUSIER
STREETS WITH LOW RISE THREE
PLEX FOUR STORY APARTMENT
BUILDINGS KIND OF TRANSITIONING
OFF OF THAT STREET INTO THE
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES BEHIND THAT
MAYBE YOU DON'T WANT TO PUT
DOWN HEIGHT LIMITS TO
ILLUSTRATE THAT BECAUSE IT
BLEEDS IT LEADS TO THE
SUGGESTION THAT YOU'RE ZONING
AND PUTTING IN HEIGHT.
RIGHT.
MAYBE JUST DESCRIBE IT AS A
VISION FOR THE KIND OF HOUSING
TYPE OF FORM THAT PEOPLE ARE
INTERESTED IN.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND THE
EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT.
I THINK I THINK WE'RE HARKING
BACK TO A WAY THAT PEOPLE USED
TO WORK THAT DOESN'T HAPPEN
ANYMORE.
SO MANY PEOPLE NOW WE'RE
WORKING OUT OF THEIR HOMES
REMOTELY UNTIL THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TELLS THEM THEY
CAN'T I GUESS NO MATTER HOW
LONG IT GOES.
BUT I THINK A LOT OF THE A LOT
OF THE SO WE ARE ONE-HORSE TOWN
OR THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
BUT I THINK THERE'S A LOT
OF SPIN OFF STUFF THAT HAPPENS
WITH THAT.
I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE WITH
CLIMATE CHANGE AND AND WHAT
DOES THAT EVER HAVE TO OFFER
GOING TO WANT TO MOVE HERE AND
CAN FIND WAYS TO WORK IN A
SMALL COMMERCIAL JUST BUILDINGS
AND OUT OF THEIR HOMES IN WAYS
THAT WE DON'T NEED TO SET ASIDE
LARGE NO NO HOUSING COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS AND SAY NO
RESIDENTIAL HERE.
I THINK THAT'S AN UNNECESSARY
THING TO DO FOR THE KINDS
OF EMPLOYMENT ACTIVITIES THAT
ARE LIKELY TO HAPPEN IN THE
CITY.
LOOKING FORWARD, NOT LOOKING
BACKWARDS, I WOULD GET RID
OF THE EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT.
LOW RISE TO ME MEANS THREE OR
FOUR STORY STRUCTURE.
THAT SEEMS TO BE WHAT EVERYBODY
SEEMS TO THINK IT IS.
I'M NOT SURE THE 35 TO 45 FOOT
THING AND I KNOW YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT STICK FELT THAT WHEN YOU
GO TO CITIES THAT HAVE REALLY
NICELY DONE APARTMENT
COMPLEXES, THEY'RE STONE BUILT
IN THAT THREE AND FOUR STORY I
THINK A DIFFERENT CONSTRUCTION
TYPES THAT MAYBE DON'T NEED TO
BE CONSTRAINED AWAY FROM
FOLLOWING YOU.
YOU'RE THINKING THEY NEED TO BE
CONSTRAINED.
>> OH NO.
GENERALLY THOSE ARE ACTUALLY
GOING TO HAVE IT'S GOING TO
HAVE ACTUALLY WOOD FRAME
STRUCTURE WITH KIND OF A STUCCO
OR A BROKEN LASSARD BUT
GENERALLY WOOD FRAME
CONSTRUCTION IS THE KIND OF THE
CHEAPEST CONSTRUCTION TYPE
SINCE THIS AREA LIKE 150
HUNDRED SEVENTY DOLLARS A
SQUARE FOOT AND SO A BRICK JUST
GETS INTO A SLIGHTLY MORE
EXPENSIVE BUILD BUT ALL BUT
YOU'RE RIGHT.
I MEAN THREE TO FOUR STORIES
THAT'S ABOUT 36 TO 48 FEET.
THAT'S THAT'S LOW RISE.
I THINK WE'RE ON THE SAME PAGE.
THAT'S WHAT PEOPLE ARE
THINKING.
YEAH.
I THINK THIS FITS WITH THIS
KIND OF VISION OF THE CORRIDOR,
THE TRANSITION CORRIDORS I GET
I'M A LITTLE BIT BAFFLED BY CAN
I CLEAR?
CAN YOU TALKED ABOUT IT FITS
FOR THE COURSE BUT I JUST WANT
TO THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT THE
MAJORITY DENSITY.
YOU'RE SAYING THAT FORCE RATE
IS APPROPRIATE TO TRANSITION TO
THESE CORRIDORS THAT MIGHT BE
TALLER AS KNOW I'M KIND
OF BOUNCING OFF OF THE
TRANSITION CORRIDOR.
OK, AND WHAT AND IT'S THE FACT
THAT THIS IS PRESENTING A
VISION OF WHAT THE CITY MIGHT
LOOK LIKE OVER TIME AS IT
BUILDS UP.
OK, SO I I DON'T KNOW MAYBE THE
WHOLE LOT OF THESE DISTRICTS
WILL TURN INTO THAT.
BUT IT SEEMS TO ME THAT IF THE
WHOLE IDEA IS TO REALLY
ENCOURAGE TRANSIT BRAIN
DEVELOPMENT WHERE PEOPLE CAN
LIVE WALK OUT OF THEIR HOUSE,
THAT TRANSITION HAPPENING ALONG
THOSE BUSY BUSIER CORRIDORS
THAT PRESUMABLY WILL HAVE
DEDICATED BUS LANES AND QUICK
TRANSIT ARE THE LIKELY PLACE
THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN FIRST
I'M RAMBLING A LITTLE BIT TOO.
I'M KIND OF HITTING OFF POINTS
I WANTED NOT IRONICALLY
HISTORICALLY WHEN PLANNERS,
DESIGNERS, ZONING OFFICIALS
TALKED ABOUT THE HIGHEST AND
BEST USE THEY WERE USUALLY
TALKING ABOUT COMMERCIAL
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITIES BECAUSE
THAT'S WHERE YOU GOT THE MOST
MONEY AND WE WERE PROTECTING
THE SINGLE FAMILY HOME FROM THE
HIGHEST AND ECONOMIC USES.
HOW BAD IS OUR HOUSING CRISIS
THAT THE HIGHEST AND BEST USE
IS HOUSING?
RIGHT.
I MEAN THAT'S JUST COMPLETELY
INVERTING THE HISTORICAL
PATTERN OF OF WHAT WE'RE
NEEDING.
SO I THINK THERE'S A ROLE FOR I
DON'T KNOW THAT WE WANT TO ZONE
SPECIFICALLY TO MAXIMIZE
PRIVATE PROPERTY RETURN ON
THEIR INVESTMENTS BECAUSE THERE
ARE LARGER COMMUNITY THINGS WE
NEED TO WORRY ABOUT AND NOT
FOCUS ON THAT.
BUT WE SHOULD BE MINDFUL OF IT
.
>> I I'M A LITTLE BIT CONFUSED
BY THE RETAIL DESIGNATIONS TO
MY MIND THE BIGGEST PROBLEM
THAT WE FACE IN ANN ARBOR IS SO
MUCH OF THE CITY IS BUILT OUT
IN A WAY THAT IT'S GOING TO
TAKE A LONG TIME FOR PEOPLE TO
ACCEPT THE ONLY WAY WE'RE GOING
TO BUILD OUT IS TO BUILD
DENSELY IN THE PLACES WHERE YOU
CAN WHICH IS THE RETAIL
QUARTERS WITH THE HOW CAN BIG
PARKING LOTS THAT ARE SITTING
RIGHT NOW THAT COULD BE TOTALLY
REDEVELOPED WITH HIGHER DENSITY
HOUSING MIXED USE, WHY ARE WE
CONSTRAINING THEM TO TO A
SHOPPING MALL LIKE SETTINGS
WHICH I THINK IS WHAT THIS IS
ENVISIONING?
AND THEN THE OTHER PROBLEM IS
THE SINGLE FAMILY NEIGHBORHOODS
WHERE ARE FOLKS LIVING THERE
WHO JUST ARE GOING TO FIERCELY
RESIST ANY KIND OF INCREASINGLY
UNSEEN UNTIL MAYBE THEY REALIZE
IT'S ACTUALLY HIGH END PIECE
COMING IN THAT'S GOING TO RAISE
THEIR PROPERTY VALUES?
OH MY GOSH.
I DON'T THINK WE COULD AFFORD
TO BUY THE HOUSE WE'RE LIVING
IN NOW BECAUSE OF THE INFLATING
PRICES THAT'S NOT SUSTAINABLE
AND IT'LL BE TO THE DETRIMENT
OF ALL OF US IF THAT TREND
KEEPS GOING.
SO SO I GUESS PUSHING BACK ON
PICKING OUT PARTS OF THIS
OF THE PLANNING OF THE CITY AND
SAYING WE'RE NOT GOING TO LET
HOUSING THERE.
THAT DOESN'T MAKE SENSE TO ME.
I THINK MIXED USE HOUSING
TRYING TO THINK THROUGH.
I ALSO WANT TO DO I KNOW THERE
WAS SOME TALK ABOUT ALLOWING
SOME KIND OF INDUSTRIAL USES
THAT WERE SMELLY OR SOMETHING.
I REMEMBER WHAT THE TERM WAS
BUT WORK I MEAN I HAD PEOPLE
TRYING TO COME TO A NUMBER TO
BUILD THOSE THINGS AND HAD NO
NO PROBLEM.
>> WE HAVE PEOPLE WHO COMPLAIN
ABOUT THEIR NEIGHBORS LIGHTS.
SO I JUST WANT I JUST WANT BE
CLEAR WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
MESSY USES THE NOTION
OF SUSTAINABLE CIRCULAR ECONOMY
WHERE YOU CAN DEMO YOUR GARAGE
,THERE'S A PLACE TO SORT YOUR
BUILDING MATERIALS AND THE IT'S
WE COULD TOTALLY DO THAT AND
YOU COULD
DECIDE TO DO THAT IN
THE R-1.
I'M I WOULD JUST TELL YOU THAT
MY EXPERIENCE FOR BOTH
PLANNING, ZONING AND
ENFORCEMENT EXPERIENCE THAT IS
PEOPLE HAVE LIMITS AND HAVE
THEIR FRUSTRATION WITH
CONFLICTING LAND USES.
AND SO WHAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
I THINK WE'VE I DON'T I WANT TO
BE CLEAR NO WE'RE NOT GETTING A
NEW TRANSMISSION PLANT BUT
THERE ARE USES THAT ARE MORE
LIKELY TO BE NEW SINCE AND EVEN
IF THEY'RE MEETING OUR NUISANCE
ORDINANCES THAT'LL BE
CONFLICTING WITH RESIDENTIAL
LAND USES
.
I'M STILL PROCESSING.
>> SO I WAS GOING TO
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT NEXT
ONE.
WE'LL COME BACK.
THANK YOU.
I'LL JUST SAY THAT I KNEW WHEN
I LOOKED AT THE PRESENTATION
PREPARING FOR THIS MEETING AND
ALL OF THE QUESTIONS IN HERE
AND IS GOING TO BE THERE'S
GOING TO BE A LOT OF LIKE
BOUNCING AROUND.
I'M GOING TO TRY NOT TO BOUNCE
TOO MUCH.
SO I'M GOING TO START WITH THE
QUESTION YOU ACTUALLY ASKED
COMMISSIONER LEE ABOUT LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL.
I'M ABSOLUTELY IN FAVOR OF THE
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL LAND USE
REPLACING ONE IN THE R TWO
SINGLE FAMILY ZONES.
>> I KNOW IT GETS INTO ZONING
BUT LIKE I WOULD SAY LET'S PUSH
THE HEIGHT LIMIT.
>> I DO HAVE A QUESTION ABOUT
WHAT DOES LIMITED COMMERCIAL
MEAN OR ENTAIL WITHIN THAT
PROPOSED LAND USE?
I DON'T KNOW YET EVERY CORNER,
EVERY CORNER NO.
>> I MEAN I HONESTLY THE
INTENTION IS THE LAND THAT JUST
ALLOWS COMMERCIAL USES IN THE
LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL GRADE.
>> I THINK JUST RESTRICTING A
RESTRICTION AND A ROAD
CLASSIFICATIONS IS ONE
POTENTIAL THAT'S GOING TO BE
GREATLY LIMITING I THINK TRYING
TO ALLOW A FIRST IN BUT
RESTRICTED AFTER IS DANGEROUS.
SO I THINK IT WOULD LIKELY HAVE
TO BE SOMETHING ABOUT CORNER
LOTS LIKE A LOT OF A LOT
OF COMMUNITIES NOW SAY LIKE IN
SINGLE FAMILY YOU CAN DO
DUPLEXES ON CORNERS.
IT MIGHT BE SOMETHING SIMILAR
TO THAT.
>> THE IDEA WOULD BE TO ALLOW
SOME COMMERCIAL WITH IN
COMMERCIAL USE HAS PERMITTED
HOUSES.
THAT'S GREAT ON GREEN ROAD
RIGHT NOW THERE'S A CHURCH FOR
SALE AND SOME OF MY NEIGHBORS
HAD A DISCUSSION ABOUT LIKE
THIS ONE THIS GREAT IS LIKE A
COFFEE SHOP TO RELOAD TO DO
LIKE CAN WE DO COMMERCIAL?
AND I WAS LIKE I THINK IN THE
NEW CAR PLAN SO I DIDN'T LIKE
IT.
I LIKE THAT I LIKE THAT ASPECT.
I THINK A LOT OF PEOPLE WOULD
TOO.
AND IT WOULD AVOID 40 MINUTE
WALKS TO COFFEE SHOPS.
I DO HAVE SOME CONCERN ALTHOUGH
I DON'T KNOW HOW TO GET AROUND
THIS WITH LIKE THE IDEA
OF USING UNITS BECAUSE I THINK
WE GET AND THIS WAS AN EXAMPLE
THE CITY PLACE LIKE WE GET
THESE MASSIVE LIKE LIKE THE SIX
BEDROOM UNITS BUT I THINK
TARGET STUDENTS MORE THAN THEY
MIGHT TARGET NON STUDENTS THEY
CAN BECOME LIKE OUT OF REACH
FOR FAMILIES AND INDIVIDUALS
LOOKING FOR HOUSING.
SO PUTTING A FOUR UNIT BUT
ACTUALLY TWENTY FOUR BEDROOM
BUILDING IN A LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL AREA DEPENDING ON
THE HOW IT'S FORMED IN SCALE
THAT COULD FEEL LIKE CRAZY AND
THAT'S LIKE A LOT OF PEOPLE I
DON'T HATE IT.
THAT'S JUST LIKE IT AND THAT'S
A CONCERN I CONTINUE TO HAVE.
>> WE BUILT LIKE SIX BEDROOM
APARTMENTS BUT I DON'T KNOW
THAT WE CAN GET AROUND THAT.
>> THAT WAS A QUESTION ABOUT IN
HERE SOMEWHERE.
I'M GOING TO AGREE WITH I KNOW
IT WAS COMMISSIONER WHICH I
THINK ALSO COMMISSIONER HAVE TO
BE ON THE TRANSECT DIAGRAM YOU
SHOWED I DON'T THINK LIKE ALL
OF THOSE THINGS CAN FIT INTO
LIKE THE LOWRIDERS ESSENTIAL.
I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO SPLIT
THE LINE DOWN THE MIDDLE LIKE I
CAN I CAN ENVISION ALL OF THEM
IN THAT ZONE OR LAND USE.
SO GENERALLY I LIKE WHERE THIS
IS GOING FOR THE RESIDENTIAL.
YEAH, I HAVE A COUPLE
OF QUESTIONS.
>> YOU STARTED OFF THE
PRESENTATION AND I'M SORRY THAT
I MISSED THE LAST STEERING
COMMITTEE MEETING AND THE LESS
MEETING BUT YOU SAID THAT
THINGS EMERGED DIFFERENTLY IN
THOSE MEETINGS AND SOME OF THE
PUBLIC COMMENT THAT YOU'VE BEEN
HEARING AND SOME SOME THINGS
LIKE HOW YOU'VE BEEN THINKING
ABOUT THE PLAN.
>> CAN YOU SUMMARIZE?
YEAH, FROM THE OUTSIDE CITY
COUNCIL DIRECTED ADDING
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY ACROSS THE
CITY EXPLICITLY IN SINGLE
FAMILY DISTRICTS AND MY
EXPERIENCE AND WHEN WE STARTED
TALKING TO THE PUBLIC ABOUT
THAT DENSITY IS A BROAD TERM
THAT MEANS VERY DIFFERENT
THINGS TO PEOPLE AND SOME
PEOPLE AT THE END OF THE DAY 70
PERCENT OF THE PEOPLE SAID
YEAH, I WANT MORE DENSITY IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD BUT A LOT OF THAT
WAS CONTEXTUALIZED WITH WE ARE
GOING TO PROVIDE FOR UNITS BY
RIGHT AND AREAS NOW THAT ONLY
ALLOW SINGLE FAMILY AND PART
OF THAT WAS THAT AT THE PROJECT
TEAMS TRYING TO NAVIGATE THE
HOW PEOPLE PROCESS THAT WORK
SOME PEOPLE HEAR THAT AND IT'S
IT'S GREAT SOME PEOPLE HEAR
THAT WORD AND THEY FEAR IT WHEN
YOU SAY WELL WHAT IF IT'S AN
ACCESSORY DWELLING OR WHAT IF
IT'S A DUPLEX?
THIS IS SOME PEOPLE FEAR THAT
AND SOME PEOPLE LOVE IT WHEN
YOU SAY WHAT IF IT'S A SIX
STOREY BUILDING NEXT TO YOUR
HOME?
WELL, SOME PEOPLE LOVE THAT.
SOME PEOPLE FEAR THAT.
AND SO WE SPECIFICALLY TALKED
ABOUT THIRTY FIVE FEET, FOUR
UNITS WITH THE PUBLIC FOR MUCH
OF THIS LAST YEAR AS A WAY
OF AND AGAIN MEA CULPA AS A WAY
OF TRYING TO ILLUSTRATE
SOMETHING BUT IT HAS INFLATED
USE POLICY.
BUT WHEN LATE IN THE PROCESS AT
BOTH THE STEERING COMMITTEE AND
THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
SUBCOMMITTEE THE CONVERSATION
CAME UP AND IT WAS VERY IT WAS
A QUICK A QUICK EVOLUTION
OF THAT THAT WE SHOULD RAISE
THE LIMIT TO FORTY AS
COMMISSIONER LEE INDICATED AND
THERE SHOULD BE NO RESTRICTION
ON THE NUMBER OF UNITS.
AND SO I WANT TO VALIDATE WITH
ALL OF YOU THE LANGUAGE IN YOUR
PLAN.
WE'RE READY TO DRAFT WHAT
YOU'RE LOOKING FOR.
THE PURPOSE OF THIS IS I HEARD
SOMEBODY SAY I ABSOLUTELY WANT
THOSE THINGS BUT I DON'T WANT
LOCKED UP IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> THOSE ARE THOSE ARE
CONTRARY.
SO SO IN WE CAN WE CAN DO THAT.
WE CAN SAY WE WANT UNLIMITED
UNITS.
WE DON'T CARE ABOUT HEIGHT OR
WE DO CARE ABOUT HEIGHT BUT WE
WANT SOME OTHER FORM BASE SCALE
THAT'S NOT A RESTRICTION ON THE
NUMBER OF UNITS IN ORDER TO DO
THAT THAT'S FINE TOO.
BUT I WANTED TO ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT THAT'S A DIFFERENT THAT'S
GOING IN A DIFFERENT DIRECTION
TO A LOT OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
CONVERSATIONS WITH US THE
CONSULTANCY OVER THE LAST YEAR
WE CAN DO THAT BUT THAT
HAPPENING DEVIATING FROM OUR
ENGAGEMENT AND WITHOUT WE I
WANTED TO FRANKLY REPLICATE
THAT CONVERSATION WITH THE
ENTIRETY THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
WE'RE GOING TO BE AS I SAID,
DOING THE SAME THING WITH THE
CITY COUNCIL SYSTEM.
MAKE SURE THAT EVERYBODY IS
AWARE OF THAT AND WE'RE GOING
TO TAKE THAT THAT DIRECTION AND
SO THAT'S THE DIRECTION WE'RE
LOOKING FOR IS DON'T CARE ABOUT
UNITS, DON'T CARE ABOUT HEIGHT.
THAT'S FINE.
WE'D LIKE TO MOVE FORWARD.
I JUST WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
THAT'S DISTINCT FROM SOME
OF THE CONVERSATIONS AND I
THINK THAT WOULD RESULT I WOULD
SPECULATE BUT THAT'S GOING TO
RESULT IN A DIFFERENT OUTCOME
OF SEVENTY THREE PERCENT OF THE
PEOPLE SAYING THEY WANT MORE
DENSITY IN THEIR NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT
NUMBER IS BUT I THINK IT WOULD
BE DISTINCT.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
THAT IS HELPFUL.
I CAN'T RESPOND TO THAT.
YOU HAVE A LOT GOING ON IN MY
HEAD.
>> I GUESS MY SECOND QUESTION
THAT SORT OF LEADS ME INTO SOME
OF THESE LIKE MIXED USE ZONING
OR MIXED USE MIXED USE JUICES
AND MY COMMENTS ARE NOT SO
FULLY ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THIS
LAND USE PLAN ON THE MAP IN THE
PRESENTATION IS 100 PERCENT
IMPROVEMENT OVER WHAT WE
CURRENTLY HAVE.
THERE WAS AN ITERATION FOR A
BRIEF MOMENT THAT HAD EVEN
FEWER LAND USES.
>> WHAT HAPPENED WHAT HAPPENED
TO THAT ONE?
>> WE'RE KIND OF VALIDATING
THAT WITH YOU NOW WITH ME AND
THE CONSULTING TEAM SEE THAT
SOME OF THOSE HUBS CAN PERFORM
DIFFERENT SERVICES AND EVOLVE
IN DIFFERENT WAYS IN OUR
COMMUNITY.
IF YOU DISAGREE WITH THAT,
YOU'RE GOING TO SEE THOSE
CONSOLIDATED INTO FEWER.
>> OK, I DISAGREE WITH THAT.
I THINK THE ONE THAT I'M REALLY
JUST GOING LIKE KIND OF GLOM
ONTO IS THE INNOVATION DISTRICT
AND I THINK I HAVE A LOT
OF PROBLEMS WITH THAT FOR TWO
MAIN REASONS.
>> ONE, I LIVE IN THAT AREA SO
LIKE PERSONALLY I'LL SPEAK FOR
MY PART OF THE SECOND WARD AND
THINGS THAT I'VE HEARD IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD WHATSAPP GROUP
SECOND IS I FEEL LIKE ALL IT'S
DOING IS CATERING TO THE
UNIVERSITY AND I KNOW THE
UNIVERSITY IS A HUGE PRESENCE
BUT I DISAGREE THAT WE'RE A ONE
HORSE TOWN.
I HAVE NOTHING TO DO WITH THE
UNIVERSITY I MEAN ALUMNI BUT MY
HUSBAND HAS NOTHING TO DO WITH
THE UNIVERSITY LIKE WE DON'T
WORK WE DON'T WORK FOR THE
UNIVERSITY.
A LOT OF OUR NEIGHBORS DON'T
WORK FOR THE UNIVERSITY LIKE
WE'RE IN ANN ARBOR FOR
DIFFERENT REASONS AND IT'S
REALLY FRUSTRATING TO SEE THE
UNIVERSITY CONTINUING TO JUST
LIKE BUY A PROPERTY OR LET
PROPERTY SIT VACANT.
SO THE IDEA THAT WE WOULD
ALLOCATE SPACE FOR THESE
HYPOTHETICAL STARTUPS WHEN
THEY'VE GOT TONS OF LAND JUST
SITTING EMPTY IN THAT SAME AREA
,I DON'T LIKE IT.
I JUST I LIKE I THINK LIKE THE
MORE HOUSING IN THAT AREA WOULD
BENEFIT IT A LOT MORE THAN
HOLDING SPACE FOR SOMETHING
THAT WE THINK MIGHT HAPPEN IN
THE FUTURE.
AND I GUESS I COULD MAKE
SIMILAR COMMENTS FOR THE OTHER
AREAS.
I JUST DON'T SEE A NEED TO
DISTINGUISH THEM SO MUCH FROM
EACH OTHER AT THIS POINT.
>> I WHEN WE LET'S GO BACK TO
SOMETHING BUT WHEN WE ZONED
THESE CORRIDORS TAKE ONE I
THINK WE ZONE THEM ALL TAKE ONE
WE DIDN'T ZONE ONE OF THEM TWO
OR THREE BECAUSE WE THOUGHT
THAT THEY HAD VERY SIMILAR
FEELING LIKE YES, THERE IS AN
URBAN LAND
, THERE IS A WHATEVER
THAT ONE IS OVER ON MAPLE
SOMETHING VILLAGE MAYBE VILLAGE
BUT IN GENERAL WE WANTED THE
SAME FEELING ON THIS BORDER AND
WE WANTED HOUSING AND WE WANTED
RETAIL AND WE LIKE THIS IS
GETTING AWAY FROM THAT A LITTLE
BIT BY BACKING OFF THE HOUSING
THAT I THINK WOULD MAKE THESE A
LOT MORE VIBRANT ZONES AREAS
OF THE CITY PARTICULARLY FOR
PEOPLE THAT DON'T LIVE HERE AND
DO LIVE ADJACENT TO THEM.
SO I THINK I WOULD LIKE TO GO
BACK TO SEEING MORE CONSISTENCY
AMONG THOSE AND ALLOWING MORE
HOUSING WITHIN THOSE ZONES.
I KEEP CALLING THEM ZONES BUT
THEY'RE NOT REALLY ZONES.
OK, I'M STOP RIGHT NOW.
>> OK, WE'RE GOING TO GO TO
COMMISSIONER APRON'S THANK YOU.
I THINK I'LL TRY TO BE BRIEF.
I MOSTLY JUST WANT TO
UNDERSCORE THAT I AGREE WITH
MANY OF THE PUBLIC COMMENTS AND
ALL OF THE COMMISSIONER
COMMENTS THAT ARE IN SUPPORT
OF LIFTING ANY RESTRICTION ON
HOUSING ANYWHERE IN THE LAND
USE PLAN.
AND I THINK IT'S INTERESTING
WHAT YOU'RE SAYING ABOUT PUBLIC
CONCEPTIONS OF DENSITY, BRETT,
BECAUSE I THINK IT FEELS TO ME
LIKE THE VERY DEFINITION
OF EXCLUSION WHICH IS TO SAY
THAT THOSE PEOPLE ARE PEOPLE
WHO LIVE HERE.
YOU EVEN REFERRED TO THEM AS
PROPERTY OWNERS AND THEY ARE
YOU KNOW, I UNDERSTAND THAT FOR
MANY OF US INCLUDING ME, MY
INDIVIDUAL OIL WEALTH SITS IN
THE PROPERTY VALUE OF MY HOME
AND SO THERE'S A CONFLICT
OF INTEREST BETWEEN MY FAMILY'S
WEALTH, MY GENERATIONAL WEALTH,
DONAL'S TRUST FOR HIS CHILDREN
AND THINGS THAT MAY THREATEN
THE VALUE OF MY HOME AND YET
I'LL IT IS THE DEFINITION
OF EXCLUSION TO SAY THAT WE'RE
GOING TO ESTABLISH POLICY AND
REGULATION AND LAW THAT MAKES
IT DIFFICULT OR IMPOSSIBLE FOR
OTHER PEOPLE TO COME AND LIVE
IN THIS COMMUNITY.
SO I DON'T SUPPORT THAT.
I THINK DENSITY ACTUALLY WE CAN
JUST TALK ABOUT A DEFINITION
OF DENSITY WHICH IS LIKE THERE
ARE MORE PEOPLE PER SQUARE
WHATEVER AREA YOU WANT TO
MEASURE THAN THERE ARE NOW
THAT'S INCREASED DENSITY.
YOU CAN DO IT BY ADDING UNITS.
YOU CAN DO IT BY ADDING MASS.
>> I MEAN WE CAN DO IT IN A
WHOLE LOT OF WAYS AND I THINK
YEAH, AN EU DOES INCREASE
DENSITY BUT THAT'S OBVIOUSLY
NOT THE SCALE AT WHICH WE NEED
TO BE.
WE NEED TO BE THINKING.
SO I AGREE WITH INCLUDING ALL
OF THE KINDS OF MISSING LITTLE
HOUSING THAT ARE IN THIS
DIAGRAM WHICH IF WE TAKE YOUR
LINE WHERE IT IS WOULD EXCLUDE
THINGS LIKE TOWNHOMES WHICH I
THINK WE ALREADY PROBABLY HAVE
PRETTY BROAD BUY IN THIS
COMMUNITY TO ALLOW TOWNHOMES IN
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND SINCE
THE MAYBE I'M WRONG ABOUT THIS
BUT SINCE THE LAND USE PLAN
DOESN'T OR THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN DOES IS NOT A ZONING PLAN
WE DON'T ACTUALLY HAVE TO
DEBATE A HEIGHT LIMIT RIGHT
NOW.
RIGHT.
CAN'T WE JUST SAY OR MAYBE TO
HELP ME MAYBE THIS IS A
QUESTION FOR YOU IS DC LIKE
DOES THE PLAN HAVE TO SAY WHAT
WE THINK LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
IS OR CAN WE CAN WE SAY LOW
RISE RESIDENTIAL LEAVE IT AT
THAT AND WHEN WE GO TO WRITE
THE ORDINANCE THEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT WHETHER THAT'S A
FORTY EIGHT FOOT RESTRICTION OR
A THIRTY FIVE FOOT RESTRICTION.
SO THAT'LL A QUESTION MAYBE A
BOOKMARK BUT TO MY MIND IT
FEELS LIKE THERE'S A KIND
OF CONSENSUS THAT LOW RISE WE
KNOW WHEN WE SEE IT AND MAYBE
THAT'S GOOD ENOUGH FOR FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND THEN I
JUST WANTED TO CHIME IN AND SAY
THAT I I DON'T THINK REGULATING
BY UNIT COUNT WORKS BECAUSE WE
JUST END UP WITH THESE BIG SIX
BEDROOM UNITS.
BUT I THINK WE DO NEED TO
REGULATE YOU WERE KIND
OF THROWING YOU AN ACCOUNT
ENTITLEMENT IN THE SAME BUCKET
AND I WOULD SAY I THINK WE DO
WANT TO TALK ABOUT A HEIGHT
LIMIT OR FARC.
>> I'M HAPPY TO EXPLAIN TO YOU
AGAIN, DAN, BUT WHAT I THINK
CAN BE ALSO EFFECTIVE BECAUSE
THE IDEA IS LIKE FARC WOULD
ALLOW YOU TO THINK ABOUT OPEN
SPACE IN A WAY THAT A HEIGHT
LIMIT WOULDN'T BUT WE COULD
COMBINE A HEIGHT LIMIT WITH
OTHER THINGS AND BLAH BLAH BLAH
BUT ALL THAT BUILDING GETS IN
THE WEEDS FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND THAT'S LIKE WE'RE
GETTING A LITTLE BIT AHEAD
OF OURSELVES.
SO JUST BACKING UP I JUST WANT
TO SAY MORE HOUSING AS MUCH
HOUSING AS POSSIBLE EVERYWHERE
.
AND I AGREE WITH COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT ABOUT VERY
SKEPTICAL OF AN INNOVATION ZONE
AND IF THERE IS REALLY A NEED I
DON'T SEE IT.
BUT IF THERE WAS A NEED FOR AN
EMPLOYMENT ZONE IT DOESN'T HAVE
TO SAY NONRESIDENTIAL.
IT COULD ALSO JUST BE SOME WAY
OF ENCOURAGING EMPLOYMENT THERE
THAT DOESN'T PROHIBIT
RESIDENTIAL THANKS,
COMMISSIONER NORTON.
>> AND THEN I'D LIKE TO ADD
ACTUALLY YEAH.
JUST A FEW POINTS NO FINISH OFF
I THINK THE THING THAT PEOPLE
FEAR THE MOST IS CHANGE AND NO
MATTER WHAT YOU PROPOSE,
THEY'RE GOING TO OPPOSE IT
FIRST BECAUSE IT'S DIFFERENT
THAN WHAT THEY'RE USED TO AND I
THINK THAT'S A LOT OF THE
RESISTANCE FROM THE FOLKS IN
THE NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> I TOTALLY GET I'M A
HOMEOWNER IN ANN ARBOR AND I
CHANGES SCARY BUT I'VE ALSO
SEEN NEW PROJECTS COME IN THAT
MY NEIGHBORS WERE VOCIFEROUSLY
AGAINST AND THEY'VE BEEN BUILT
AND NOW NOBODY IT'S LIKE FINE.
>> IT'S NOT THE PROBLEM THAT
EVERYBODY ENVISION THAT WAS
GOING TO BE AND IT'S I'M A
LITTLE BIT WARY OF NOT WANTING
TO STOMP ON TOES BECAUSE PEOPLE
ARE GOING TO RESIST BECAUSE
IT'S DIFFERENT AND WE CAN'T YOU
KNOW, CAN'T ALLOW THAT TO
HAPPEN.
>> SO MAYBE I KNOW YOU SAID
FORM BASED CODES ARE REALLY
HARD TO ADMINISTER AND THEY'RE
VERY PROBLEMATIC BUT I THINK
FOLKS ARE WAY MORE WORRIED
ABOUT THE FORM OF THE STRUCTURE
THAT'S GOING IN THAN THEY ARE
ABOUT MOST OTHER THINGS THEY
WANT TO KNOW WHAT IT'S WHAT'S
GOING TO LOOK LIKE.
DOES IT FIT IN WITH THE
CHARACTER OF THE PLACE THEY'RE
NOT MAYBE SO WORRIED ABOUT THE
NUMBER OF UNITS.
I MEAN MAYBE WE NEED TO WORRY
ABOUT CAN WE SERVICE THEM WITH
THE INFRASTRUCTURE WE HAVE?
BUT IT'S MUCH MORE THEIR
CONCERN ABOUT WHAT'S THE FORM
GOING TO LOOK LIKE AND DOES IT
FIT WITH THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
AND THERE'S A WHOLE LOT WE
COULD BE EVOLVING TO INCREASE
THE DENSITY THROUGH NICELY
BUILT AND CONSTRUCTED HOMES
THAT ARE WELL DESIGNED.
AND I KNOW I'VE HAD
CONVERSATIONS FOLKS ABOUT HARD
IS TO DO DESIGN REVIEW AND
THAT'S A DIFFICULT HISTORY
THERE.
BUT MAYBE LET'S FOCUS ON THAT
INSTEAD OF SETTING ASIDE NO
RESIDENTIAL EMPLOYMENT
DISTRICTS AND NO RESIDENTIAL
INNOVATION DISTRICTS, MAYBE WE
SHOULD REVISIT OUR NUISANCE
LAWS IF THE PROBLEMS ARE THE
THINGS THAT ARE HAPPENING ARE
CREATING REAL NUISANCES, MAYBE
WE NEED A TIE WHAT WE'RE DOING
WITH PLANNING AND ZONING TO
REVISITING THE NUISANCE RULES
SO THAT THEY ARE ALL OF A PIECE
AND THEN THE LAST POINT I'LL
MAKE IS I'M NOT SURPRISED AT
ALL THAT NOTHING'S HAPPENED IN
THE THAKOON DISTRICTS IN THREE
YEARS BECAUSE IT'S A PRETTY
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE TO WHAT'S
THERE AND IT'S GOING TO TAKE
FOLKS A WHILE AND DEVELOPERS I
RECKON TO KIND OF CONTEMPLATE
WHAT COULD WE DO NOW AND HOW
WOULD WE GET THE CURRENT STUFF
THAT'S THERE OUT OF THE LEASES.
I KNOW IT'S A STICKY LONG
INVOLVED PROCESS BUT THE PLAN
OUGHT TO BE THE REALLY
VISIONARY.
>> WHERE DO WE REALLY WANT TO
GO?
AND LET'S THINK BOLDLY AND I'LL
COME BACK TO THE POINT I WANT
TO MAKE AGAIN.
WE SHOULD BE THINKING SERIOUSLY
ABOUT ABOUT THE BRIARWOOD, THE
AABA LAND, THE MAPLE VILLAGE
DIPLOMAT THOSE ARE PRIME PLACES
TO CREATE NEW DOWNTOWNS THAT
BRING IN THE DENSITY THE
DENSITY OF THE RETAIL THAT
WOULD BE THERE INSTEAD
OF TRYING TO MAINTAIN A MALL
THAT SERVES A REGIONAL SHOPPING
MARKET WHICH REQUIRES BIG
PARKING LOTS.
THAT'S WHERE A LOT OF THE NEW
INTENSE DEVELOPMENT WOULD BE
GOING ARE ON THOSE PLACES.
LET'S FIGURE OUT HOW TO CREATE
A VISION THROUGH THE PLAN FOR
THOSE THINGS AND THEN FOLLOW UP
WITH THE ZONING CODE INSTEAD
OF SETTING THEM ASIDE.
WE'VE ALREADY LOCKED OURSELVES
INTO SO MUCH TROUBLE WITH THE
PLAN AND ZONING COULD WE HAVE
IN PLACE.
LET'S NOT KEEP LOCKING
OURSELVES INTO TROUBLE AND
LET'S TRY AND MOVE BEYOND THAT.
WOW.
I THOUGHT I WAS A LITTLE
STUMPED THERE.
>> YEAH.
SOME SPEECH GOING NO NO THAT
WAS THAT WAS GREAT AND I WILL
FOLLOW THAT UP.
>> WHAT I DO AGREE AND IF I WAS
IF I WERE TO TRY TO SUMMARIZE
KIND OF WHAT I'VE HEARD TO FROM
BOTH THE PUBLIC COMMENTERS AS
WELL AS THE COMMISSION, I THINK
LARGELY THE EMPLOYMENT
NONRESIDENTIAL ZONE WE SHOULD
NOT HAVE LET'S GET RID OF THAT
RESTRICTION.
>> I THINK THAT'S CLEARLY UP
AND I THINK THERE I WANT TO
CREATE SOME LEVEL OF CONTACT
GENERALLY ABOUT AVERAGE PER
SQUARE FOR NEW RAZZY IS ABOUT
THREE DOLLARS AND FIFTY CENTS
ISH A SQUARE FOOT.
SO THAT SAYS ON A PER MONTH
BASIS.
SO IF YOU ANNUALIZE IT'S ABOUT
FORTY TWO DOLLARS A SQUARE FOOT
SO SOMEWHERE BETWEEN THIRTY SIX
OFFICE RIGHT NOW DOWNTOWN
FORTY TWO DOLLARS A SQUARE FOOT
CLASSES PROBABLY LOW 30S
OFFICE RIGHT NOW DOWNTOWN
CLASPERS PROBABLY LOW 20S IT
CLASSES PROBABLY LOW 30S
ALL DEPENDS ON INCENTIVES ETC.
CLASPERS PROBABLY LOW 20S IT
BUT I THINK THAT'S THAT
ALL DEPENDS ON INCENTIVES ETC.
ACTUALLY REVERSE DYNAMIC
BUT I THINK THAT'S THAT
OF WHERE RESIDENTIAL AGAIN SUB
ACTUALLY REVERSE DYNAMIC
IT'S AROUND TWO PERCENT VACANCY
OF WHERE RESIDENTIAL AGAIN SUB
RATES AND YOU I THINK OFFICES
IT'S AROUND TWO PERCENT VACANCY
ACTUALLY RIGHT ABOUT THAT
RATES AND YOU I THINK OFFICES
SOUNDS ABOUT RIGHT.
ACTUALLY RIGHT ABOUT THAT
>> FIFTEEN THERE'S SOME SHADOW
SOUNDS ABOUT RIGHT.
SPACE SO THERE ARE SPACES THAT
>> FIFTEEN THERE'S SOME SHADOW
ARE LEASED BUT NO ONE'S
SPACE SO THERE ARE SPACES THAT
ACTUALLY UTILIZING THEM AND
ARE LEASED BUT NO ONE'S
THAT CAN BE ACTUALLY
ACTUALLY UTILIZING THEM AND
PROBLEMATIC FOR RESTAURANTS AND
THAT CAN BE ACTUALLY
THINGS LIKE THAT IN THE
PROBLEMATIC FOR RESTAURANTS AND
DOWNTOWN AREA.
THINGS LIKE THAT IN THE
SO I THINK THAT THERE IS
DOWNTOWN AREA.
DEFINITELY I THINK SOME OF THE
SO I THINK THAT THERE IS
FEAR MIGHT BE IF WE ALLOW LIKE
DEFINITELY I THINK SOME OF THE
MAYBE ALL THAT GETS BUILT IS
FEAR MIGHT BE IF WE ALLOW LIKE
RASI AND THEN WE DON'T ACTUALLY
MAYBE ALL THAT GETS BUILT IS
HAVE AN ECONOMIC BASE BUT AT
RASI AND THEN WE DON'T ACTUALLY
THE SAME AND I THINK THAT'S
HAVE AN ECONOMIC BASE BUT AT
ALSO A CONCERN TO CONSIDER
THE SAME AND I THINK THAT'S
BECAUSE WE ARE AN
ALSO A CONCERN TO CONSIDER
INSTITUTIONALLY RELIANT ANCHOR
BECAUSE WE ARE AN
INSTITUTIONAL RELIANT CITY.
INSTITUTIONALLY RELIANT ANCHOR
>> RIGHT?
INSTITUTIONAL RELIANT CITY.
WE ARE I THINK THE FOURTH MOST
>> RIGHT?
DENSELY CONCENTRATED WITH ONE
WE ARE I THINK THE FOURTH MOST
INSTITUTION.
DENSELY CONCENTRATED WITH ONE
>> RIGHT.
INSTITUTION.
THAT'S LIKE NEW HAVEN,
>> RIGHT.
CONNECTICUT ETC. SO I THINK
THAT'S LIKE NEW HAVEN,
ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION IS
CONNECTICUT ETC. SO I THINK
SOMETHING THAT WE DEFINITELY
ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION IS
TALKED ABOUT BUT I ABSOLUTELY
SOMETHING THAT WE DEFINITELY
AGREE WITH THAT.
TALKED ABOUT BUT I ABSOLUTELY
>> THE MOST SALIENT PLACE THAT
AGREE WITH THAT.
WE CAN MAKE IMPACTS ARE GOING
>> THE MOST SALIENT PLACE THAT
TO BE THOSE LARGE INFILL
WE CAN MAKE IMPACTS ARE GOING
PARKING LOTS.
TO BE THOSE LARGE INFILL
>> RIGHT.
PARKING LOTS.
AND I THINK THE CONFLICT THAT
>> RIGHT.
EXISTS WITH RETAIL AND I DON'T
AND I THINK THE CONFLICT THAT
KNOW WHERE WE GOT IN AND I
EXISTS WITH RETAIL AND I DON'T
THINK THIS IS WHERE THE RETAIL
KNOW WHERE WE GOT IN AND I
SPECIFIC HUB CAME FROM TCI ONE
THINK THIS IS WHERE THE RETAIL
DOESN'T PLAY WELL WITH BIG
SPECIFIC HUB CAME FROM TCI ONE
EXISTING RETAILERS AND THAT'S
DOESN'T PLAY WELL WITH BIG
BECAUSE THE CURRENT DC ONE
EXISTING RETAILERS AND THAT'S
REQUIRES LIKE SEVENTY PERCENT
BECAUSE THE CURRENT DC ONE
GLAZING HAS FRONT EDGE KIND
REQUIRES LIKE SEVENTY PERCENT
OF LIKE REQUIREMENTS.
GLAZING HAS FRONT EDGE KIND
>> IT'S ALMOST QUASI FOREIGN
OF LIKE REQUIREMENTS.
BASED IN A CERTAIN RESPECT AND
>> IT'S ALMOST QUASI FOREIGN
HAVING DONE A FEW OF THESE BIG
BASED IN A CERTAIN RESPECT AND
BOX JUR BOX RETAILERS LIKE
HAVING DONE A FEW OF THESE BIG
WHOLE FOODS OR BEST BUY THEY
BOX JUR BOX RETAILERS LIKE
HAVE VERY
SPECIFIC FRONTAGE
REQUESTS LIKE WHEN THEY COME IN
AND THEY'RE LIKE THIS IS WHAT I
NEED.
>> RIGHT?
AND SO INSTEAD OF SAYING LIKE
NO RAZZY OR IT'S RETAIL
SPECIFIC, IT'S WE SHOULD ALLOW
THE FLEXIBILITY IF IF THEY
TRULY ARE ABLE TO COMMAND FORTY
FIVE DOLLARS A SQUARE FOOT THEN
IT SHOULD BE ECONOMICALLY
STIMULATING INSTEAD PROHIBITING
RAZIE WE SHOULD TRY TO FIGURE
OUT WHY THERE ARE CONFLICTS
WITH WHY BRICKS MORE WOULD BE
AGAINST ONE.
>> RIGHT.
THEY BROUGHT A REALLY GOOD MEMO
TO US BUT I DO THINK THAT WE
CAN BE MORE EFFECTIVE AT
DELIVERING THE HOUSING UNITS WE
NEED IF WE TAKE A LOOK AT THOSE
SPECIFIC TESI ONE CORRIDOR'S
ETC. NOW DC ONE IS A PERFECT I
MEAN WE'VE BEEN GOING THROUGH
THIS ONE HAS DEFINITELY ITS
CHALLENGES BUT I THINK THAT WE
NEED TO BE MORE PERMISSIVE
RATHER THAN RESTRICTIVE THAT SO
SO I THINK TO KIND OF RECAP
WHAT I'VE BEEN HEARING AS FAR
AS AGAIN NONREADERS ZONES ON
EMPLOYMENT NOT NECESSARY THE
MIXED-USE I THINK I HEARD
PEOPLE LIKE WHY NOT JUST ONE
BUT I THINK I ACTUALLY HEARD
SOME PRETTY GOOD ARGUMENTS FOR
WHY HEY BASED ON THE PROXIMITY
AND ADJACENCY TO RASI THIS JUST
A LAND USE CATEGORY.
IT'S NOT NECESSARILY DOWN
ZONING SO I'M ACTUALLY OK WITH
THAT CONCEPT AND THEN WITH
RETAIL HUBS I THINK THIS IS
ACTUALLY WHERE WE CAN CREATE
THE MOST AMOUNT OF EXCITEMENT
IN TERMS OF ACTUALLY IMPACTING
THE NUMBER OF UNITS.
>> AGAIN, A HEALTHY HEALTHY
ENVIRONMENT IS GOING TO BE
ABOUT FIVE TO SEVEN PERCENT
VACANCY RATE THAT WILL ACTUALLY
START TO MAKE AN IMPACT ON
RENTAL RATES THREE BY THE WAY,
THREE BUCKS AND FIFTY CENTS A
SQUARE FOOT.
>> THAT MEANS THAT FOUR
THOUSAND SQUARE FOOT APARTMENT
IS THIRTY FIVE HUNDRED A MONTH
THAT THAT IS THAT'S JUST TOO
HIGH ITSELF.
>> I THINK WE NEED MEANINGFUL
UNIT DELIVERY AND THAT CAN
HAPPEN ON THESE CORRIDORS SO
LARGELY I THINK THE IDEA SHOULD
BE LET'S TRY TO BE MORE
FLEXIBLE WITH RETAIL HUBS,
UNDERSTAND AND THE ISSUES THAT
THEY HAVE WITH RESPECT TO
LEASEHOLD RESTRICTIONS, WHICH
IS FRONTAGE REQUIREMENTS THEY
HAVE COMPRESSIBLE RATIOS FOR
HOW TIREE LIKE PARKING LOTS
HAVE TO BE.
THEY HAVE PARKING LOT
REQUIREMENTS.
>> RIGHT.
THEY HAVE TO HAVE ONE SPACE FOR
EVERY THREE HUNDRED SQUARE FEET
ETC. SO AH I'M SORRY IT'S GOING
TO BE ABOUT FOUR FOUR PER
THOUSAND SQUARE FEET.
>> SO I THINK RETAIL HUBS YOU
WANT TO BE A LITTLE BIT MORE
FLEXIBLE BUT ALSO PERMIT RAZZY
AND THEN WITH RESPECT TO
INNOVATION HUB I THINK THAT IS
AGAIN WE DO WANT TO ENCOURAGE
ECONOMIC DIVERSIFICATION AND
THAT CAN BE CHALLENGING AND
THAT IS A REAL BALANCING ACT TO
DO.
>> BUT PROHIBITING AND CREATING
MORE RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS WITH
RESPECT TO THOSE SEEMS TO BE
SOMETHING THAT PEOPLE DO NOT
WANT TO SEE LARGELY LAST ITEM I
WANT TO JUST SAY I DON'T KNOW
THAT FIFTY FIVE OR FORTY EIGHT
WHATEVER HEIGHT IS I DON'T KNOW
WHAT'S APPROPRIATE OR CORRECT.
>> I HAVE SAID THAT FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF I THINK WHAT
MAKES SENSE TO ME WOULD BE
REMOVING CONFLICTS BETWEEN
BUILDING THE STATE BUILDING
CODE AND OUR ZONING CODE TO THE
EXTENT THAT IT IS PRACTICAL.
>> AND SO IT'S NOT TO SAY THAT
NORMATIVELY I BELIEVE IN A
SPECIFIC HEIGHT FOR A SPECIFIC
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT THAT IS
CERTAINLY NOT THE CASE.
I'M JUST TRYING TO PROFFER THE
LOGIC THAT WE SHOULD TRY TO
REDUCE CONFLICTS AND MULTIPLE
PLACES THAT DEVELOPERS TO LOOK
AT AND SAY HEY, OH JEEZ.
>> WELL THE DEFINITION FOR NON
SPRINKLERED HEIGHT IS HERE BUT
THE ZONING IS SAYING THIS BUT
THERE ARE CONFLICTS AND IS IT
TO THE HEIGHT OF FACH, IS IT TO
THE PARAPET ETC. SO I I JUST
WANT TO HELP TO TRY TO UNIFY
SOME OF THE DEFINITIONS SO
HOPEFULLY THAT COVERED THE VAST
MAJORITY OF KIND OF QUESTIONS
THAT YOU HAD AND I WILL ALSO
PROVIDE SOME ROOM WE'LL GO TO
COMMISSIONER WAGENEN COUNCIL
MEMBER DESH I JUST WANTED TO
FOLLOW UP WITH COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT COMBATTED WAS THE
JULY 17TH PRESENTATION OF THE
SUBCOMMITTEE WHERE WE GOT THE
THREE ZONES SO WE WENT FROM
THIRTY FOUR TO THREE AND NOW
WE'RE SOMEWHERE AROUND THIRTEEN
.
>> CAN WE GET BACK TO FOUR LIKE
BECAUSE I FEEL LIKE THAT THAT
FELT REALLY GOOD AND I THINK
OUR BIG ISSUE IN THAT MEETING
AT LEAST IT WAS FROM ME IS THAT
WE WERE CALLING WHAT WE'RE NOW
CALLING LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
NEIGHBORHOOD RESIDENTIAL AND I
HAD A BIG OBJECTION TO THAT
BECAUSE IT MEANS WHEN WE THINK
ABOUT HOUSING WE ARE ALWAYS
THINKING ABOUT A SINGLE HOUSING
TYPE AND AS SOMEONE WHO GREW UP
IN MULTIPLE HOUSING TYPES, I
DON'T THINK IT'S APPROPRIATE
FOR US TO SAY THAT JUST BECAUSE
SOMEONE WHO LIVES IN A
MULTIUNIT DEVELOPMENT THAT
THAT'S NOT A NEIGHBORHOOD AND I
WANT TO PUSH IN ON THIS POINT
BECAUSE THIS IS WHAT WE'RE
DOING IS ABOUT REAL PEOPLE.
AVALON, WHICH IS MY NEIGHBOR ON
PLATT ROAD WITH VIRIDIAN THAT
PROJECT IS THE PROJECT THAT GOT
ME INTO ADVOCACY FOR AFFORDABLE
HOUSING.
THAT FIRST MEETING WAS AT THE
COUNTY FARM PARK IN TWENTY
FOURTEEN.
I TOOK MYSELF AND MY FIVE OR SO
INTERNS AND I STAYED CONNECTED
TO THAT PROJECT ALL THE WAY
UNTIL THE COUNTY COMMISSIONERS
DECIDED TO GO AHEAD AND SELL IT
.
>> THESE ARE MY NEIGHBORS.
WE JUST HOSTED AVALON IN OUR
CHURCH FOR THEIR ANNUAL HOLIDAY
PARTY SO THAT ALL OUR RESIDENTS
FOR THE VERY FIRST TIME COULD
COME TO A SINGLE PLACE AND ALL
BE TOGETHER TO SORT
OF CELEBRATE WHAT AVALON IS
DOING IN OUR COMMUNITY.
>> AND I THINK IT IT'S
IMPORTANT FOR US TO RECOGNIZE
THAT WHEN AVALON ANNOUNCED THE
AVAILABILITY OF TWENTY UNITS
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING THEY
RECEIVED OVER SEVEN THOUSAND
APPLICATIONS.
>> THAT MEANS SIX THOUSAND NINE
HUNDRED AND EIGHTY PEOPLE ARE
IMMEDIATELY LOOKING FOR HOUSING
.
>> SO WHATEVER THIS PLAN DOES I
HOPE IT'S PRIMACY IS HOW DO WE
ANSWER THOSE INDIVIDUALS AS A
COMMUNITY?
>> THESE ARE FOLKS WHO ARE
ALREADY HERE WHO WANT TO LIVE
HERE AND ARE LOOKING FOR PLACES
WITH ALL PAUSE AND THEN I JUST
HAVE ONE FINAL COMMENT BUT I
WANTED TO SAY SOMETHING
I
WANTED TO DISCUSS THE
EMPLOYMENT ZONE IN RESIDENTIAL
UM JUST TO PUT A FEW THINGS IN
PERSPECTIVE THE EMPLOYMENT ZONE
AS IT IS NOW ON S INDUSTRIAL
DOES NOT ALLOW HOUSING SO WE
HAVE NOT TAKEN ANY HOUSING
AWAY.
>> UM, SECONDLY, IT ONLY
CONSTITUTES ABOUT TWO PERCENT
OF ALL LAND USE SO 98 PERCENT
OF THE LAND IN THE CITY PERMITS
HOUSING.
>> SO WITH THESE PROJECTIONS
THAT WE'VE SHOWED YOU AS WELL
WE WOULD BE PERMITTING UP TO
97000 MORE UNITS WHICH IS MUCH
MORE THAN COULD PROBABLY EVER
BE BUILT.
SO I JUST I AM SOMEONE WHO
WANTS TO BUY A HOME IN ANN
ARBOR.
I I'M VERY PRO HOUSING.
I THINK THIS PLAN IS VERY PRO
HOUSING.
I JUST WANT THAT TO BE A PART
OF THE RECORD BECAUSE I DON'T
WANT IT TO LOOK AS IF THIS
EMPLOYMENT ZONE IS THE ANSWER
TO SOLVING THIS RIGHT.
IF WE ALLOW ZONING AND IF WE
ALLOW HOUSING IN EVERY SINGLE
SQUARE INCH OF THIS CITY, WE
MIGHT STILL NOT SOLVE THIS
HOUSING CRISIS.
HOUSING MIGHT STILL BE QUITE
EXPENSIVE FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE.
SO I WOULD JUST LIKE THAT TO
NOT BE TO MISLEADING HERE THAT
WE ARE RESTRICTING HOUSING AND
THEREFORE IT'S TO EXPENSIVE.
IT'S ALREADY VERY EXPENSIVE AND
IF WE CONTINUE TO ALLOW IT IT'S
GOING TO BE EXPENSIVE.
OUR HOPE IS THAT WE CAN BUILD
ENOUGH SUPPLY SO THAT WE REDUCE
THE RATE AT WHICH IT GOES UP.
>> THAT'S SORT OF OUR BEST CASE
SCENARIO.
>> WE'RE NOT GOING TO BE ABLE
TO DROP THE COST OF HOUSING
SIGNIFICANTLY IN THE NEXT
COUPLE OF YEARS.
>> SO I WILL LEAVE WITH THAT.
>> THANK YOU, ART.
>> HAVE THE SECOND POINT OK?
YEP.
SO YEAH MY SECOND POINT IS FOR
THIS PLAN THE THING THAT I AM
HOPING WE DON'T DO IS CREATE A
BUNCH OF NONCONFORMING
STRUCTURES.
SO AS I WAS LOOKING AT WHERE
SOME OF THESE ADDITIONAL ZONES
ARE GOING IN THEIR PUTTING
THEY'RE GOING TO CREATE
NONCONFORMITY LIKE FIVE CORNERS
.
I THINK THE DEVELOPMENTS ON
CHURCH AND FORCE WOULD BECOME
NONCONFORMING AND SO WANTING TO
MAKE SURE THAT HOWEVER WE SORT
OF LABEL WHATEVER WE'RE NOT
CALLING TTK ONE THAT WE DON'T
CREATE A CASE WHERE WE KNOW WE
WANT TO PUT THAT KIND
OF HOUSING IN A PLACE THAT IS
ADJACENT TO THE UNIVERSITY THAT
WOULD BE EASY FOR THAT HOUSING
TO GO THAT WE DON'T SORT
OF RESTRICT IT BECAUSE OF THE
LAND USE AND WE KNOW THAT
DEVELOPERS START WITH THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN WHEN THEY
COME AND PRESENT THE FIRST
THING THEY SAY OUT OF THEIR
MIND THEIR MOUTHS IS THIS
DEVELOPMENT FITS THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AND IT GOES
DOT, DOT, DOT.
>> SO I JUST WANTED TO MAKE
SURE THAT THE THAT GOT INTO THE
RECORD AS WELL AS YOU ALL ARE
TAKING FEEDBACK FROM US.
THANK YOU COUNCILMAN RITESH.
I JUST WANTED TO UNDERSCORE
THAT I THINK THE DISCUSSION
OF LOW RISE HOUSING AT THE
TABLE TONIGHT WAS TENDING
TOWARD ASKING FOR A MEANINGFUL
INCREASE OVER THE CURRENT 30.
>> AND SO IF 35 WAS DISCUSSED
IN THAT OUTREACH THAT PROBABLY
DOESN'T FEEL LIKE A MEANINGFUL
INCREASE BECAUSE IT'S A SMALL
PERCENTAGE OVER AND AND THERE
HAS BEEN I'M I'M NOT QUALIFIED
TO
SETTLE THIS DISPUTE BUT
REGULATING A NUMBER OF UNITS
DOES NOT SEEM GOOD TO ME
BECAUSE I WORRY THAT WE WILL
GET HIGH BEDROOM UNITS WHEN
SINGLE YOU KNOW WHEN TWELVE
EFFICIENCY APARTMENTS WOULD BE
MORE USEFUL PROBABLY ON THE
MARKET THAN FOR SIX BEDROOM
APARTMENTS.
SO SO I AND IF WE REGULATE BY
NUMBER OF UNITS IN THESE IN
THIS LOW RISE IN WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO GET IN WHAT ARE
CURRENTLY ARE ARE ONE AND TWO
ZONES I JUST WORRY THAT WE'RE
GOING TO GET THINGS THAT THAT
DON'T ADD HOUSING DIVERSITY FOR
US BECAUSE WE'RE GETTING A LOT
OF RENTALS WITH SIX BEDROOM
UNITS AND SO THAT'S NOT
DIVERSITY.
>> SO BUT AGAIN PRICE POINT IS
I DON'T THINK WE CAN AFFECT
THAT WITH THE ZONING SO AND I'M
REALLY GLAD OF OF MISS BENNETT,
YOUR PLANNER BENNETT YOUR LAST
COMMENT ABOUT THE EMPLOYMENT
ZONE IS HEALTHY INDUSTRIAL
ISN'T TAKING HOUSING AWAY.
>> IT'S NOT TAKING THE
POSSIBILITY OF HOUSING AWAY AND
AS I SAID EARLIER, I THINK IT
MAY BE OFFERING IS SOMETHING
THAT CAN BE USEFUL.
WHAT I HAVE APPRECIATED ABOUT
THE COMMENTS TONIGHT IS NOT
NECESSARILY I MEAN IN MY VIEW
I'M NOT SURE THAT THE
EMPLOYMENT ZONE SHOULD BE OFF
THE TABLE BECAUSE I KNOW THERE
ARE OTHER APARTMENTS IN THE
CITY THAT ARE LOOKING TO DO
THINGS AND THEY CAN'T FIND LAND
TO DO.
I KNOW HOW LONG IT TOOK US TO
FIND A PLACE FOR THE ELECTION
CENTER.
I KNOW THAT THE CONSTRAINTS
OF THE THINGS THAT WE WERE
LOOKING FOR MEANT THAT IT
LOOKED LIKE WE MIGHT HAVE TO GO
OUT TO TOWNSHIPS.
>> SO I JUST DON'T THINK THAT
OUR DISCUSSION HERE IS
REFLECTING ALL THE
CONSIDERATIONS THAT NEED TO BE
BROUGHT TO BEAR ON THAT ISSUE
AND MAYBE EMPLOYMENT ZONE IS IS
NOT THE BEST NAME TO CAPTURE
WHAT'S PRIVATE AND I DON'T KNOW
I DON'T REALLY CARE BUT I THINK
THAT THERE'S COMPLEXITY THERE.
I I BUT WHAT I DO THINK THAT
THIS DISCUSSION HAS BROUGHT UP
IS IS SOUTH INDUSTRIAL A PLACE
THAT LENDS ITSELF TO THE KIND
OF WALKABILITY AND MIXED USE
THAT WE'RE LOOKING FOR AND WHAT
WE'VE SEEN WITH BEEKMAN IS WHAT
WE HOPE WOULD HAPPEN WHEN WE
PERMIT DENSITY IS THAT WE'VE
GOTTEN COMMERCIAL THAT WASN'T
THERE AND THE COMMERCIAL
APPEARS TO BE THRIVING AND WHAT
WE HAVE IN SOUTH INDUSTRIAL IS
COMMERCIAL THAT'S THRIVING
BECAUSE PEOPLE CAN EITHER DRIVE
OR THEY DO HEROICALLY LONG
WALKS IN THE POLYVORE HACKS TO
GET THERE AND IT MIGHT BE YOU
KNOW, A PLACE WHERE WE WOULD
LIKE TO HAVE MORE RESIDENTIAL
BUT THAT BUT I'M NOT I DON'T
THINK THAT WHOLE AREA IS THAT I
THINK IT'S PART OF WHAT IS THE
EMPLOYMENT ZONE THERE.
I DON'T THINK THAT THE PARTS
THAT SOUTH OF NINETY FOUR IS
THAT I AM NOT GOING TO SAY THAT
THERE ISN'T THERE AREN'T OTHER
PARTS OF THE CITY THAT I MIGHT
NOT WANT US TO KEEP A PLACE FOR
A BIG A LARGE STRUCTURE WHERE
YOU CAN COUNT BALLOTS.
I MEAN I KNOW WE ALREADY HAVE
IT BUT I'M JUST GIVING AN
EXAMPLE.
IT'S NOT THE ONLY THING THAT
WE'RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT
NEEDING.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT NEEDING A
PLACE WE CAN WASH THE
RETURNABLE CONTAINERS WHEN THAT
PROJECT SCALES UP.
>> I MEAN THERE'S STUFF THE
CITY IS DOING AND SO I JUST
DON'T WANT IT OFF THE TABLE
BECAUSE I DON'T THINK YOU KNOW.
YEAH, I'M SORRY.
>> I JUST THAT'S ALL I MEAN I
CAN'T THERE'S NOTHING WE CAN WE
DON'T HAVE A CRYSTAL BALL.
>> YEAH.
AND I'LL ADD TO THAT BECAUSE I
DO THINK THAT WHILE HOUSING IS
SALIENT IT'S EXTREMELY
EXPENSIVE.
>> RIGHT.
AND SO IT BUT THERE IS A
DEFINITELY A BALANCING ACT IN
THE LONG SCHEME OF THINGS ON
THE 50 100 YEAR HORIZON THAT
HAS TO HAPPEN FROM THE
STANDPOINT OF FOR EXAMPLE,
CAYLEY'S CENTER OF EXCELLENCE
OR WHETHER IT IS SARTORIUS.
>> RIGHT.
THESE MASSIVE JOB DRIVERS ARE
IMPORTANT FOR THE FUTURE
ECONOMIC VIABILITY.
>> I MEAN WE HAVE NINETY FOUR
THOUSAND JOBS.
WE HAVE FIFTY FOUR ISH THOUSAND
HOUSING UNITS.
CLEARLY THERE'S AN IMBALANCE
THAT EXISTS CURRENTLY IN THE
LONG SCALE OF THINGS.
>> WHAT MAKES AND WHY IT'S
DRIVING RENTS SO HIGH IS
BECAUSE IT IS A CONCENTRATION
OF TALENT BECAUSE THERE IS A
LOT OF PATENTS, A LOT
OF RESEARCH FUNDING THAT IS
BEING DRIVEN LARGELY HERE AND
SO TO CREATE SPACE FOR THAT I
THINK HAS SOME I THINK IT'S A
DELICATE BALANCING ACT FROM A
LAND USE STANDPOINT.
THE QUESTION IS SHOULD BE
RESTRICTIVE.
RIGHT.
AND SHOULD WE SAY IT'S
DESIGNATED FOR SPECIFICALLY FOR
THIS OR SHOULD WE LET THE
MARKET KIND OF SHAKE ITSELF
OUT?
>> AND THE CONCERN WOULD BE
THAT WOULD THESE BUILDINGS BE
BUILT SPECIFICALLY WITH RAZIE
IN MIND THAT MAKES IT TOO
DIFFICULT TO CONVERT IF THE
MARKET SHIFTS IN FAVOR OF A
DIFFERENT TYPE OF COMMERCE.
>> AND SO I WANT TO GIVE I DO
WANT TO HIGHLIGHT THE
IMPORTANCE OF ECONOMIC
DIVERSIFICATION.
I CERTAINLY DON'T I MEAN IT MAY
SOUND LIKE A CONTRAST WITH
PRIOR COMMENTS BUT BECAUSE IT
IS A BALANCING ACT AND WE CAN'T
NECESSARILY TAKE EXACTLY WHAT
IS EXTREMELY SALIENT TO US AT
THIS POINT IN TIME AND SAY THAT
THAT WILL FOREVER BE THE CASE
AS THIS IS A GUIDING DOCUMENT
FOR FOR THE NEXT 50 YEARS OR
SO.
>> BUT THAT BEING SAID, I THINK
MORE FLEXIBILITY IS BETTER.
SO AGAIN, I DO WANT TO GIVE
CREDENCE TO WHAT YOU'RE SAYING
WITH THAT WE ARE AT NINE FIFTY
RIGHT NOW.
>> I WANT TO YES.
MR. LEONARD POINTED TO COMMENTS
ADDITIONAL WHAT I'D LIKE TO DO
IS IF IF YOU'RE I'D LIKE TO
SORT OF REFLECT BACK WHAT I'M
HEARING AND THE STEPS THAT I
INTEND TO TAKE.
YES.
WITH THIS INFORMATION ABOUT IF
YOU'RE READY FOR IT AND I JUST
WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE THAT I'VE
HEARD CONFLICTING FEEDBACK AS
WE'VE GONE AROUND THE TABLE.
I HAVE NOT ASKED FOR A VOTE BUT
I'M TO DO MY BEST TO INTERPRET
THAT AND TELL YOU THE DIRECTION
THAT I WANT TO GO IN BEFORE I
DO.
I JUST WANT THERE WAS A LOT
OF CONVERSATIONS ABOUT YOU.
YOU YOUR CONSULTANTS ARE DOING
THIS.
YOUR CONSULTANTS ARE DOING
THAT.
I WANT TO BE CLEAR OUR
CONSULTANTS ARE BRINGING THE
EXPERTIZE THAT YOU ARE
WRESTLING WITH AT THIS VERY
TABLE.
THAT'S WHY WE'RE HIRING THEM TO
BRING THIS TO THE TABLE.
AND SO I WANT TO BE CLEAR WHEN
THERE'S COMMENTS MADE THAT I
CANNOT BELIEVE THAT THEY HAVE
DONE THIS OR THIS IS SOMEHOW A
PERCEIVED FAILURE THAT THEY DID
THAT THIS IS THESE ARE THE
EXACT SAME ISSUES THAT BROUGHT
US TO THIS TABLE, THAT
CONVERSATION THAT YOU JUST HAD.
AND I AM PROUD THAT WE WERE
ABLE TO BRING THESE QUESTIONS
TO YOU BECAUSE I THINK IT MAKES
YOUR ULTIMATE AND MORE THOUGHT
OUT AND BALANCE.
BUT THIS IS WHAT I AM HEARING
IS TAKEAWAYS AND DIRECTION FOR
US TO WORK ON THIS PLAN THAT
LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL SHOULD
REPLACE OUR ONE IN OUR TWO AND
THAT LIKELY IS A DEVELOPMENT
PATTERN THAT ALLOWS AN
UNLIMITED AMOUNT OF UNITS
LIKELY IN A FOUR STORY ISH
SCALE AND YOU ARE INTERESTED IN
REGULATING THAT BY SOME
MECHANISM NOT BY A NUMBER
OF UNITS BUT RATHER BY FORM
WHEN WE'RE TALKING ABOUT WHAT
GOES INTO THAT IT BE AS BROAD
AND EXPANSIVE AS POSSIBLE.
THERE WAS CONVERSATION ABOUT
THE APPROPRIATE NESS
OF LOCKWOOD TO BE IMPOSED IN
THAT I AM INTERPRETING YOUR THE
THE BALANCE OF YOUR
CONVERSATION AS THAT'S FINE IF
LOCKWOOD GOES INTO A
NEIGHBORHOOD THAT'S FINE AS
LONG AS IT IS MEETING THE
WHATEVER THOSE FOREIGN BASED
REQUIREMENTS THOSE FOR HEIGHT
THAT IS FINE.
SO WE ARE NOT GOING TO BE
TRYING TO SOMEHOW ARBITRARILY
SCALE DOWN THE SIZE
OF BUILDINGS BEYOND SOME LARGE
PARAMETERS TO PROVIDE THE MOST
FLEXIBILITY THAT YOU IDEALLY
WOULD LIKE A PLAN THAT SEEKS TO
REGULATE THAT SCALE BY
SOMETHING OTHER THAN THE NUMBER
OF UNITS.
>> AS I SAID AS IT RELATES TO
THE MIXED USE AREAS AND HOPES
AND CORRIDORS I AM HEARING AND
LET ME THROW THE EMPLOYMENT
ZONE IN THERE'S I AM HEARING
YOU DON'T WANT NINETY EIGHT
PERCENT OF THE CITY PLAN
RESIDENTIAL YOU WANT ONE
HUNDRED PERCENT OF THE CITY
PLAN FOR RESIDENTIAL YOU DON'T
WANT TO SEE ANY RESTRICTIONS.
>> SO WE WILL REALLY TAKE A
HARD LOOK AT OUR MIXED USE
JOBS.
>> I THINK THAT THERE'S LIKELY
GOING TO BE A CONSOLIDATION
OF THOSE WHERE WE WILL PROBABLY
LOOK AT A VERY SIMILAR LANGUAGE
FOR THOSE THERE WAS SOME
CONVERSATION ABOUT FLEXIBILITY
OF RETAIL BECAUSE OF SOME
OF THE UNIQUE ASPECTS.
THAT'S EXACTLY WHERE WE ARE
COMING FROM.
BUT I DIDN'T HEAR THAT
RESONATED WITH A LOT OF OTHER
COMMISSIONERS SO I FULLY
ANTICIPATE THAT GOING INTO THE
SAME MORE UNIFIED APPROACH THAT
MIGHT SEEK THE SAME CHARACTER
RECOMMENDATIONS AS THE OTHER
MIXED USE HUBS AND THE DOWNTOWN
DISTRICT.
SO THOSE ARE THE TAKE OR THOSE
ARE THE THOSE THE MARCHING
ORDERS THAT I AM HEARING FOR US
TO START WORKING ON AS FAR AS A
PLAN I THOUGHT VOTES ON ALL
THOSE THINGS WOULD HAVE BEEN
HARD.
>> I UNDERSTAND THAT WITHIN
THAT THERE ARE SOME
PERSPECTIVES MR. DESHU
INDICATED THAT I THINK YOU'RE
STILL UNEASY WITH BUT I'M DOING
MY BEST TO TRY TO READ THE
MAJORITY OF WHAT I'M HEARING
AND DELIVER YOU A DOCUMENT THAT
IS IN FACT YOU'RE NOT THE
COAUTHOR OF YOU ARE THE AUTHOR
OF SO DID I MISCHARACTERIZE ANY
OF THAT UP?
MR. ADAMS, I MENTIONED LOCKWOOD
EARLIER AS SOMETHING THAT I
DON'T THINK WE WOULD PROBABLY
WANT PLOPPED IN THE MIDDLE
OF AN HOUR ONE OR AN HOUR OR
TWO AND AGAIN, I DIDN'T HEAR
THAT REPLICATED NO, NO, NO.
>> I JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY
THAT WASN'T TO SAY SPECIFICALLY
LOCKWOOD RIGHT.
>> IT WAS TO USE AN EXAMPLE
OF AND I'M NOT A I'M NOT
OPERATING IN A POLITICAL
CAPACITY BUT THE PLAN AT THE
END OF THE DAY IS A POLITICAL
DOCUMENT APPROVED THROUGH A
POLITICAL PROCESS AND THERE IS
AN OUTER LIMIT ON WHAT PEOPLE
WILL ACCEPT AND THAT THAT HAS
TO BE, YOU KNOW, OBVIOUSLY
ACCOUNTED FOR AND THAT'S THE
ONLY REASON I BROUGHT IT UP.
>> BUT I JUST WANTED TO CLARIFY
SOMETHING.
THAT'S WHAT ALSO WHAT I'M
TRYING TO CLARIFY I I NEED YOUR
HELP TO HELP GUIDE BECAUSE
YOU'RE DELIVERING THAT YOU'RE
THREADING THAT NEEDLE.
>> YEAH.
YEAH.
>> COMMISSIONER ROATAN I WOULD
SAY YES.
THOSE ARE PRETTY GOOD MARCHING
ORDERS TO START WITH BUT I
WOULD SAY WE'RE PROBABLY GOING
TO REVISIT ALL OF THEM.
>> I MEAN IT'S REALLY HARD TO
RESPOND TO THINGS UNLESS WE
HAVE SOMETHING IN FRONT OF US.
WELL, YOU KNOW BUT WE WE WANT
THESE ARE FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS
THAT WE WANTED SO THAT WE CAN
START WORKING, FRAMING AND
PRESENTING THAT BACK SO YOU AND
THE COMMUNITY ARE USEFUL
EXERCISE AND I APPRECIATE THE
FEEDBACK WE'RE GETTING ABOUT
THE REASONING BEHIND IT AND
WE'RE ALL GRAPPLING THESE ARE
THESE WERE EASY PROBLEMS.
>> WE WOULDN'T BE HAVING THESE
DIFFICULT CONVERSATIONS SO I
GUESS MY SENSE IS PROCEED AND
KIND OF WHAT WHAT YOU HEARD IS
A GOOD STARTING POINT AND THEN
ONCE WE HAVE SOMETHING MORE
TANGIBLE IN FRONT OF US, WE'LL
BE ABLE TO NOODLE ON IT MORE
AND RESPOND MORE FULLY IS THAT
YEAH.
THERE IS A LOT I DON'T MEAN TO
SPEAK FOR THE WHOLE COMMISSION
BUT I THAT'S MY SENSE OF NO I
THINK THAT'S I THINK THAT'S
ACCURATE THAT UH THIS WILL BE
AN ITERATIVE PROCESS.
>> THERE AREN'T CLEAR CUT
DEFINED ANSWERS.
>> THERE ARE DIFFERENT
VIEWPOINTS, DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVES THAT WE HAVE TO
CONTINUE TO CONSIDER.
>> BUT TO I THINK WHAT YOU'VE
SUMMARIZED SO FAR IS BEEN CLEAR
WITH RESPECT TO OUR DISCUSSION
TONIGHT.
>> GOOD LUCK, STACEY.
>> OH, COMMISSIONER HERRON'S
JUST TWO THINGS.
ONE, I JUST WANTED TO SAY THAT
I THINK MAYBE TO PLAN OUR
BENNETT'S COMMENTS I THINK
THOSE ARE HELPFUL AND MAYBE
WHAT I AM THINKING IS THAT THE
EXTREME REACTION OR WHAT FEELS
LIKE MAYBE AN EXTREME REACTION
TO THIS IDEA OF THE TWO PERCENT
AND NOT EVEN PROHIBITING
HOUSING BUT EVEN LIMITING
HOUSING IN CERTAIN ZONES IS
EVIDENCE OF THE EXTREME NEED
YOU AND THE DEPTH OF THE CRISIS
SO THAT LIKE THIS WHAT MAY
APPEAR TO BE, YOU KNOW, A MINOR
THING BECAUSE IT'S TWO PERCENT
I THINK ACTUALLY HAS A BIG
IMPACT.
SO IT'S FOR ME KIND
OF UNDERSCORES THE NEED THAT WE
HAVE.
BUT THE OTHER THING IS MAYBE
MORE TO THIS DISCUSSION, MR.
LEONHARDT, CAN YOU SAY AGAIN
WHAT YOU WERE SAYING ABOUT
FLEXIBILITY IN RETAIL?
I'M NOT SURE I FOLLOWED WHAT
YOU WERE SUMMARIZING THERE.
>> YEAH, WE WERE ONE OF THE ONE
OF THE CHANGES THAT COMPLICATED
THE FUTURE LAND USE MAP WAS
DESIGNATING THE RETAIL CENTERS
NEAR INTERCHANGES DISTINCTLY
FROM OTHER CORRIDORS RECOGNIZE
THAT THEY'RE FROM AN ECONOMIC
PERSPECTIVE THEY HAVE A PRETTY
UNIQUE REGIONAL ROLE.
THEY ARE FRANKLY MORE AUTO
CENTRIC AND SOME OF THE OTHER
FACTORS AROUND THOSE WE I AND
THE TEAM WERE QUESTIONING
WHETHER OR NOT APPLYING THE
SAME ASPIRATIONAL FORM BASED
STANDARDS THAT CURRENTLY APPLY
TO THEM ARE GOING TO BE A
BARRIER FROM ADDING RESIDENTIAL
TO PARKING LOTS AND RETAIL
CENTERS GIVEN THE FACTORS I WAS
COMMENTING I WAS HEARING
COMMISSIONER TALK ABOUT ECHOING
SOME OF THOSE CONCERNS THAT
SOME OF THERE ARE SOME SPECIFIC
ASPECTS AND FACTORS ABOUT
RETAIL CENTERS THAT MIGHT MAKE
IT REALLY CHALLENGING TO JUST
MEET OUR FOREIGN BASED
REQUIREMENTS NOW THAT WE HAVE
LIKE FOR EXAMPLE OUR CURRENT
ONE WITH VISIBILITY INTO THE
STREET AND LIMITED SERVICE
PARKING RATIOS AND SO THAT WAS
THE QUESTION WAS POSED BECAUSE
I WANTED TO I WANTED TO POSE
THE QUESTION REALLY DIRECTLY.
WE WANT TO PROVIDE MORE
FLEXIBILITY THAT IS REDUCE
EXPECTED NATIONS TO PROVIDE
MORE AVENUES THERE AND
GENERALLY WHAT I AM HEARING IS
NO, WE DO NOT.
>> YES, YEAH.
I THINK I MISSED THAT POINT AND
I APOLOGIZE FOR THIS BUT I
MAYBE IT'S NOT CLEAR TO ME IS
WHAT FLEXIBILITY MEANS.
>> SO IS IT LIKE SOME OF THE
LESS TRANSPARENT REQUIREMENTS
BY TRANSPARENCY OR RETAIL ON
THE CORNER, THAT KIND OF THING?
>> SOME OF THE CASE STUDIES
THAT ARE INCLUDED IN THE
PRESENTATION MIGHT NOT MEET.
>> THEY MIGHT INCLUDE SINGLE
STORY BUILDINGS.
THOSE ARE NOT PERMITTED UNDER
OUR CURRENT ZONING FRAMEWORK.
SOME OF THEM MIGHT HAVE BEEN AN
ADAPTATION OF AN EXISTING SITE
AND WHEN TAKEN IN TOTAL AREN'T
GOING TO MEET OUR MAXIMUM
PARKING REQUIREMENTS AS WE
CURRENTLY HAVE DESIGNATED FOR
THOSE PROPERTIES.
SO THOSE ARE EXAMPLES
OF POTENTIAL EVOLUTIONS.
>> THOSE THAT ARE CURRENT
REGULATORY FRAMEWORK MIGHT BE A
BARRIER AND SO THE QUESTION WAS
WOULD YOU LIKE TO PROVIDE MORE
FLEXIBILITY?
>> I MEAN THAT HAS LOWER
STANDARDS OF PHYSICAL
DEVELOPMENT IN ORDER TO
ENCOURAGE MORE ACTIVITY AT
THOSE QUICKER.
AND THE BOY THE CONSENSUS THAT
I HEARD FROM THE MAJORITY
OF COMMISSIONERS NOW WE'RE NOT
INTERESTED IN THAT.
>> OK, AND THEN ONE RELATED
QUESTION TO THAT IS THE DC ONE
PROJECT AT STATE AND EISENHAUER
STILL IN THE PIPELINE?
>> IT'S STILL UNDER REVIEW.
OK, OK.
>> COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE,
FINAL COMMENT.
YEAH, I JUST HAD ONE POINT
OF THAT THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
I DISCOVERED THE LAST TIME WE
TALKED ABOUT THIS IS WE TALK A
LOT ABOUT.
>> SO THIS IS RELATIVE TO LIKE
THE EMPLOYMENT NONRESIDENTIAL
WHEN WE TALK IN SARTORIALIST
COMES UP A LOT AND I JUST
WANTED TO PUT A DATA POINT OUT
SARTORIUS HAS 16 ACRES AND THEY
EXPECT IN 2016 TO HAVE THREE
HUNDRED EMPLOYEES.
AND I JUST WANTED TO POINT OUT
THAT THE UNIVERSITY HOSPITALS
HAVE 53000 EIGHT HUNDRED AND
THIRTY ONE EMPLOYEES.
SO WE'RE TALKING EVEN A BIG
EMPLOYMENT HUB TAKES UP 16
ACRES OF BUILDABLE SPACE FOR
300 EMPLOYEES AND THAT WE MAY
NOT BE A ONE HORSE TOWN BUT
WE'RE NOT A SARTORIUS TOWN AND
THAT THAT IF WE'RE GOING TO SAY
NO RESIDENTIAL ON LARGE SWATHS
FOR A FEW HUNDRED EMPLOYEES
THAT THAT MAY NOT BE A GOOD
BALANCE.
>> TO BE CLEAR, WE'RE NOT
SAYING WE WEREN'T PROPOSING NO
RESIDENTIAL IN LARGE LOTS.
WE WERE PROPOSING NO
RESIDENTIAL TWO PERCENT TO TWO
PERCENT OF THE CITY'S LENNAR
AND I THINK ONE THIRD YEAH.
>> AND I THINK THE POINT ON
PROPORTIONALITY IS IMPORT THAT
WE MAY BE ABLE TO DELIVER A LOT
OF HOUSING AND VERY SMALL YOU
KNOW, PORTIONS LIKE FOR EXAMPLE
ARBOR SOUTH AND A THOUSAND
UNITS ON 10 ACRES I THINK.
>> AND SO I THINK THAT'S THAT'S
IMPORTANT TO KEEP IN MIND.
DO YOU THINK YOU HAVE ENOUGH
FEEDBACK FROM US AT THIS POINT
?
I DO.
I'M HOPING TO GET A WINK AND A
NOD FROM THE CONSULTANTS.
YEAH, GOOD LUCK.
>> YEAH, I'LL TAKE A SMILE.
YES, AND TO BE CLEAR I WILL BE
PACKAGING YOUR FEEDBACK WITH
OUR CONVERSATION WITH THE CITY
COUNCIL SO THAT WILL LIKELY BE
MORE OF A REPORTING OUT OF WHAT
DIRECTION WE'VE GOTTEN FROM YOU
AND HOPEFULLY ALL ON THE SAME
PAGE.
>> YEAH, OK, GREAT.
AND FOR WHAT IT'S WORTH, THANK
YOU TO ALL OF YOU THAT SPOKE
TODAY.
THIS WAS PROBABLY THE BIGGEST
TURNOUT WE'VE HAD SO WE REALLY
APPRECIATE THAT CIVIC
ENGAGEMENT.
>> SO I REALLY APPRECIATE YOUR
OK WITH THAT.
>> WE ARE ACTUALLY MOVING ON TO
NEXT BUSINESS WHICH IS
STORMWATER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
OVERVIEW.
>> WE ARE LOOKING TO POINT A
PLANNING COMMISSION
REPRESENTATIVE TO THE
COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN ADVISORY GROUP.
>> MR. LEONARD, YOU AND JAN
RECEIVED OVERVIEW OF THIS
PLANNING EFFORT.
IT'S NOT DISCONNECTED FROM OUR
PREVIOUS CONVERSATION.
THE CITY HAS A LOT
OF INFRASTRUCTURE ANALYSIS
GOING ON THAT ARE GOING TO BE
ANOTHER THING THAT WE'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO SOLVE FOR WHEN WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT GROWTH OF THE
CITY.
BUT IN THIS CASE WE'RE WORKING
ON A STORMWATER THEY WOULD LIKE
TO PUT TOGETHER A STORMWATER
ADVISORY GROUP THE SWAG AND
WHEN I THINK A SWAG OF COURSE
WE THINK OF COMMISSIONER NORTON
LET'S GO INDICATED AN INTEREST
IN SERVING ON THAT.
AND SO I WOULD LIKE THE
COMMISSION THROUGH YOUR BYLAWS
TO GIVE HIM THE OFFICIAL NOD TO
REPRESENT THE PLANNING
COMMISSION IN THAT GROUP.
>> SO MOVED MOVED BY
COMMISSIONER YHWH.
IT'S OK.
IT'S A VERY LONG DAY AND
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF VOICE CALL ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR SAY AY AY YI OPPOSED
CONGRATULATE MR SWAG LET'S GO.
>> OK MOVING ON TO PUBLIC
COMMENT THIS IS A SECOND
OPPORTUNITY FOR INDIVIDUALS TO
SPEAK UP THE THREE MINUTES ON
ANY ISSUE WILL FIRST HEAR FROM
THOSE PRESENT AND AND REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SMOKE PROPERLY
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE BY PHONE
OR USE A PHRASE HAND FEATURE ON
ZOOM YOU WILL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE MUTE
BACKGROUND NOISES AND SPEAK
CLEARLY FOR ALL PARTISAN'S
PARTICIPANTS PLEASE STATE YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS AT THE
BEGINNING OF THE COMMENTS.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY MR. CHAMBERS?
>> DR. CHAMBERS?
YEAH.
SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH FOR THE
CONVERSATION.
I REALLY APPRECIATED WHAT I
HEARD.
SORRY IF I CAME ACROSS A LITTLE
ROUGH AND GRUFF AT THE
BEGINNING I JUST PRETENDED TO
PUSH YOU DOWN A LITTLE BIT BUT
ANIBA FROM NINETEEN FORTY TWO
HUNDRED AND FIFTY PERCENT BY
NINETEEN EIGHTY IT'S
ESSENTIALLY FLAT FROM 1980 TO
TWENTY TWENTY
SO THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN COULD LEAD
TO MORE GROWTH.
I'VE WORKING WITH A LAND TRUST
GROUP IN TOWN HERE.
SOME OF YOU HEAR ME RATTLE ON
ABOUT IT NOW AND THEN WE THINK
THAT HOUSING NO MATTER HOW IT'S
GOING TO DEVELOP GOING FORWARD
IS STILL GOING TO BE EXPENSIVE
AS YOU SAID HERE RIGHT NOW
MIDDLE INCOME FAMILIES CANNOT
AFFORD NEWBOLD'S PER THE DATA I
GAVE YOU EARLIER.
THEY CANNOT AFFORD MEDIAN
LISTINGS.
ANN ARBOR IS NOT AFFORDABLE TO
MIDDLE INCOME LET ALONE LOW
INCOME HOUSEHOLDS.
THE DENSITY THAT YOU'RE PUSHING
FOR A LONG CORRIDORS HAS THE
ADDED BENEFIT OF IF WE CAN
BUILD OUT OUR TRANSIT WE CAN
GET PEOPLE OUT OF CARS.
SO WHILE WE MAY NOT BE ABLE TO
REDUCE THEIR COST OF HOUSING,
WE CAN REDUCE THEIR COST
OF LIVING.
I JUST WANT THAT TO SINK IN A
LITTLE BIT BECAUSE THAT'S WHY
WE'RE BUILDING DENSITY IS TO
GET PEOPLE OUT OF CARS LIKE
WE'RE ASKING FOR WALKABLE
STREETS AND EVERYTHING.
SO MY APOLOGIES IF I'M
PREACHING TO THE CHOIR HERE.
I'M SEEING A LOT OF HEADS NOT
EVEN IF YOU GROANS BY THE WAY,
TAXI HASN'T HAD ANY BUILDOUT
OUT BECAUSE OF HIGH INTEREST
RATES IF YOU TALK TO JEFF
HOFFMAN AND WHY HE TOOK AN
EXTRA YEAR TO SUBMIT HIS PLANS
AND JUST LIKE I DIDN'T KNOW
WHERE THE MARKETS WERE GOING, I
COULDN'T COME FORWARD RIGHT
AWAY.
>> YOU KNOW, I'M SURE YOU
TALKED TO HIM RIGHT?
MAYBE SO, YOU KNOW, BUT PLEASE
DON'T SAY IT TOOK ONE WASN'T
ACCEPTABLE OR HASN'T WORKED
BECAUSE NOTHING'S BEEN BUILT.
I THINK THAT'S UNFAIR.
IT'S NOT ACKNOWLEDGING OUR
ECONOMIC TIMES.
SO I THAT'S JUST NOT TO LET
PEOPLE SAY THAT AGAIN,
ESPECIALLY THE PLANNING
COMMISSION OR TO THE PLANNING
COMMISSION.
THE INNOVATION DISTRICTS
OF THEM GREW BY THIRTY FIVE
THOUSAND EMPLOYEES AND STUDENTS
OVER THE PAST TWENTY YEARS.
IF YOU'VE LOOKED AT THEIR
MASTER PLAN THEY HAD MORE
PROPERTY ON THE EAST SIDE
OF TWENTY THREE THAN THEY HAVE
ON THE WEST SIDE OF TWENTY
THREE LETTING THAT SINK IN.
WE DON'T NEED AN INNOVATION
DISTRICT IN THE NORTHEAST
CORNER VIEW BUBON IS COMING IN
WITH KAYLEIGH AND OTHER
TENANTS.
THEY'RE FOLLOWING THE STANFORD
MODEL OF THE LAND TRUST BECAUSE
ALL OF THOSE CORPORATE ENTITIES
THAT STANFORD PARK ARE PAYING
STANFORD FOR THE USE OF THE
LAND AND THEY'RE REAPING
BILLIONS INTO THEIR TRUST FUNDS
INTO THEIR TRUST FOR IT.
THAT'S THEIR ECONOMIC MODEL BLM
IT'S MOVING IN THAT DIRECTION
AS WELL.
>> I GUESS THAT'S MY TYPE.
SO BY THE WAY, I'VE BEEN
WORKING WITH ANOTHER FACULTY
GROUP IN TOWN AND WE'RE
PITCHING THEM TO BUILD OUT
EMPLOYEE HOUSING TO FIVE TO TEN
THOUSAND UNITS PER AREA BOTH
WITH PRETTY COMPLEX.
WE'VE GOT A SET OF STUDENT
TEAMS.
THEY'RE PROPOSING TEN THOUSAND
UNITS OF EMPLOYEE HOUSING AND
STUDENT HOUSING.
SO YOU'RE SLOWLY STEPPING UP TO
THE ROLE WOULD BE PRESENTING TO
THE REGENTS AS WELL.
IT'S NOT JUST UP TO THE CFO BUT
WE'VE BEEN MEETING WITH THEM
TOO.
SO WE'VE GOT TO HAVE HOUSING
EVERYWHERE ACROSS THE CITY AND
YOU IS GOING TO CONTINUE TO
GROW.
THEY'RE LIKELY TO INCREASE
THEIR EMPLOYMENT AGAIN BY THAT
SAME NUMBER IN THE STUDENT
COUNT BY THAT SAME NUMBER.
AND WE'RE GOING TO BE RIGHT
BACK WHERE WE ARE EVEN IF WE
BUILD UP MORE HOUSING.
>> SO I'LL STOP THERE.
THANK YOU.
>> DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE
PRESENT I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
AT THIS TIME.
THANKS FOR STICKING WITH US.
IT'S BEEN A LONG NIGHT.
I WANT TO MAKE TWO POINTS.
THE FIRST IS THAT WE'VE TALKED
A LOT ABOUT USES THAT WE MIGHT
WANT TO PROTECT LAND FOR.
I'VE HEARD THINGS LIKE THRIFT
SHOPS AND THEIR STORAGE OR
FACILITIES FOR WASHING REUSABLE
CONTAINERS AND I JUST WANT TO
MAKE THE POINT THAT ALL
OF THESE THINGS ARE COMPATIBLE
WITH HOUSING.
IF YOU BUILD UP A I'VE BEEN TO
THRIFT STORES IN CITIES THEY
EXIST IN MULTISTORY BUILDINGS.
I DON'T KNOW IF I'VE EVER BEEN
TO REUSABLE CONTAINER WASHING
FACILITY BUT I THINK THAT IS
ALSO COMPATIBLE WITH HOUSING.
ALL OF THESE THINGS CAN HAPPEN
AND MORE SO I WON'T KEEP
HARPING ON THAT POINT.
THE SECOND POINT IS I AM A
HOMEOWNER IN ANN ARBOR AND
BECAUSE OF THE WAY THAT SOCIETY
WORKS IT IS THE LARGEST
INVESTMENT MANY OF US WHO CAN
MAKE.
SO OBVIOUSLY WE ALL CARE ABOUT
OUR PROPERTY VALUES.
I ALSO AM CONCERNED ABOUT MY
HIGH TAXES BUT I ALSO LOVE THE
SERVICES THAT ANN ARBOR
PROVIDES.
ANN ARBOR IS AN INCREDIBLE
PLACE TO LIVE AND I DON'T WANT
MY TAXES TO GO UP WHICH MEANS
IF I WANT THE SAME SERVICES AND
LOWER TAXES I NEED MORE PEOPLE
TO SHARE THAT BURDEN WITH NEED
MORE DENSITY TO HAVE ME PAY
LOWER TAXES.
I THINK I SAW A COUPLE
OF RESPONSES TO TONIGHT'S
AGENDA FROM A COUPLE
OF HOMEOWNERS WHO ARE CONCERNED
ABOUT DENSITY AND MAYBE THEIR
PROPERTY VALUES.
AND I JUST WANT TO SAY AS A
HOMEOWNER I WOULD LOVE MORE
DENSITY.
I THINK IT HELPS US ALL OUT.
WE TALKED A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
TRANSPORTATION EARLIER.
DENSITY ENABLES SAFE
TRANSPORTATION NETWORKS WHICH
ENABLE LOWER CARBON PRODUCTION
TRANSPORTATION.
SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
>> HELLO HELLO AGAIN.
I APPRECIATE THE DISCUSSION
TONIGHT.
I THINK I'M HAPPY THAT YOU'RE
TAKING ANOTHER LOOK AT AREAS
THAT WOULD OTHERWISE RESTRICT
HOUSING ESPECIALLY WITH HIGHER
HEIGHTS CONTEMPLATED FOR LOW
RISE.
I WOULD CHALLENGE EVERYONE TO
THINK ABOUT WHAT THE UTILITY
OF THE TRANSITION MIXED-USE
TRANSITION DISTRICT IS IF WE
ARE ALLOWING HIGHER HEIGHTS AND
LOW RISE I THINK SOME OF THOSE
CORRIDORS THAT ARE IN PLACES
LIKE LONG MILLER SOME OF THE
BUSIER ROADS THAT SOME SOME
OF WHICH TEND TO BE RENTAL
WOULD BE THE ONES THAT
ORGANICALLY REDEVELOP ANYWAY.
I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO IMPOSE
A HIGHER HEIGHT ALLOWANCE THERE
THAT MIGHT NOT ALLOW SOME
PODIUM BUILDINGS IS THAT REALLY
WHAT'S GOING TO EVOLVE IN THOSE
NEIGHBORHOODS ANYWAY?
I WOULD JUST LIKE YOU TO TAKE A
LOOK AT THAT AND IN MY MEMO I
DREW A DIAGRAM OF HOW SOME
OF OUR FORESE AREAS LIKE SOUTH
OF S YOU SOUTH OF WILLIAM AND
FORTH WARD IF THOSE ARE
TRANSITION AS AS CURRENTLY
CONTEMPLATED THAT WOULD CAP OUT
AT AROUND 80 FEET IF IT WERE TO
SEE ONE OR SOMETHING REBRANDED
ONE AMMU ONE ALL THOSE AREAS
WOULD BE 120 FEET.
SO YOU KNOW, BECAUSE IT WOULD
ALLOW A MORE SUDDEN TAPER
TOWARD THE MORE POLITICALLY
SENSITIVE AREAS OBVIOUSLY.
SO I JUST I DON'T SEE THE
UTILITY IN SPREADING OUT A HUGE
ZONE FOR A TAPER.
>> I JUST I QUESTION THE
UTILITY OF IT.
LOTS OF LOVELY PICTURES IN MY
MEMO YOU CAN LOOK AT BRICKS AND
MORTAR IS NOT OUR FRIEND.
THEY WROTE A COMPLAINT ABOUT
THIS ONE BECAUSE A LOT OF THEIR
TENANTS DON'T EVEN ALLOW THEM
TO BE NEAR MULTI STOREY
BUILDINGS.
THEY DON'T ALLOW LESS THAN THIS
BLACK FRIDAY PARKING SITUATION.
SO THERE WAS THE IMPLICATION
THAT, YOU KNOW, BY BY STOPPING
THEM FROM EXPANDING WE WOULD BE
MAKING THESE STRIP CENTERS
DECREPIT OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
SOME OF THE MOST LOVED PLACES
IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD ARE IN THE
PLYMOUTH ROAD MALL WHICH WHICH
IS AN AGING STRUCTURE WHICH OUR
PACKARD AND PLANT YOU KNOW
THESE PLACES AS THEY AGE THEY
ARE NATURAL RETAIL INCUBATORS.
I DON'T THINK IT'S BAD TO LET
PLACES AGE AND WAIT FOR THEM TO
REDEVELOP IN A IN A DENSE
FASHION.
>> AND YOU KNOW, EVERY TIME WE
ALLOW A STRIP CENTER TO
RENOVATE LIKE THE DOLLAR TREE
ACROSS FROM OUR LAND OR ADD TO
IT IT RENEWS ITS LEASE ON LIFE,
WE WOULD BE LOCKING OUR WE'RE
BASICALLY GIVING UP MANY, MANY
ACRES ON THE EAST AND WEST
SIDES OF OF THE CITY IF WE
ALLOWED THOSE TO INCREMENTALLY
REDEVELOP.
>> THANKS THANKS FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
THANK YOU.
MR. WESTFALL.
DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE CALLERS?
>> I THINK THOSE ARE THE ONLY
THREE FOLKS REMAINING SO NO
HANDS RAISED.
OK, GIVE IT A FEW MORE MOMENTS
.
>> OK WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO
CLOSE PUBLIC COMMENT.
WE'RE GOING TO GO ON TO
COMMISSION BOTH BUSINESS.
>> ARE THERE ANY ALL RIGHT.
NOT SEEING ANY WE MOVE ON TO
THE FINAL ITEM OF OUR AGENDA
WHICH IS A GERMAN MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER WHITE SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR SAY I.
HI.
WE ARE ADJOURNED.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU